
So, welcome to Maps of Meaning. So the first question I guess I might have is, what, why are you here? Anybody got an interesting reason? Student answers: Uh, I want to be able to manipulate reality to my best interests. That's a good plan. Student answers: Yeah. Except for the manipulate part. Laughter Student answers: Maybe my wording is off? It's okay. It's better to work with reality, generally, than to manipulate it cause it tends to hit back. Anyone else? Yeah. Student answers: Uhh, my friend took this class a couple years ago and he kind of threatened me to take it. Oh yeah. Student answers: Cause apparently he said that the course actually changes like For the, for the better? Student answers: Yeah. Students' laughter That's good. Student answers: You made him write a short story or something, and made him want to become an author. Now he's a published author. Really? Student: Yeah Is he any good? Student answers: I never read his book actually. Students' laughter Ooh. Some friend you are. No wonder he threatens you. Yeah. Student answers: I audited this course six years ago, and the course changed the way I see the world. So I want to see after six years what happens now. You want to see if it'll change back? Students' laughter Well that's good. So why did you decide, why, uh, why after all this time did you decide to come back? Student answers: Well I thought about the things you discussed in the class over those six years, but now, um, it's been awhile and I want to refresh myself and see, you know, with the new experience I've had, and the new things I've learned, how and what I can take from it now. Hmm, hmm. Well that's very, um, dedicated and hopefully useful. Student answers: My friend said that he had a spiritual awakening from taking this course. God, I hope I didn't see that. He did, eh? Student: Yeah Did he give you any, any, like, any, description or? Was it associated with an epileptic seizure? Students' laughter Student: It was associated with a lot of like, visions Oh really, eh? Oh that's interesting. Yeah that can get out of hand, that sort of thing, you know. No, that's, that's interesting. I mean, one of the things that I experienced when I started to learn some of the things that I'm going to talk to you guys about is a very radical increase in the intensity and clarity of my dreams. It wasn't pleasant, by the way. But, it was useful. Most useful things aren't that pleasant. So you're in for some of the same punishment, I guess that's the plan, is it? Student answers Alright, alright, anybody else? Student answers: I sort of have an independent interest in Existential Psychology. Nietzsche, Jung, etc. This seemed like a good place to discuss it, and I took your previous class, personality. Personality? Student answers: I liked it a lot. When did you take that? Student answers: Couple years ago. Yeah? Yeah, well it's a good preparation for this class. Now, is there anybody here who doesn't have any idea what this class is about, and more or less showed up because the time is right or anything like that? So you don't really have any idea what you're in for? Student answers Alright, well I'm gonna jump right into it because why not? So I'm gonna talk to you for about two hours, and then you can have a break, and then I'm gonna tell you what you have to do in the class. But, by that time you'll know if you wanna take the class because you'll know whether or not you were interested in what I told you about. So I'm going to video the class - I always do that. So the videos will be online, ones from previous years are online as well. So hopefully that'll be a useful resource. It shouldn't take me as much setup time the next time as it did me today. I'm still getting used to this equipment. So, I wanna tell you why I'm telling you the things that I'm going to tell you. When I was approximately the same age that you people are, probably a little bit older as I imagine you guys are around 21 or something like that. I was probably about your age and a couple years older. First year I was in graduate school, in particular, which I guess was in 1985, so I was 23 then. That was in 1985, and there are a couple of times in the late 20th century where the Cold War really came to a peak. And one time, I guess, was probably in about 1957 when, I think it was 57. I hope I have my dates right. Whenever Stalin announced that he had developed a hydrogen bomb, and I don't know how much you guys know about hydrogen bombs, but all you really need to know about a hydrogen bomb is that they use atom bombs as a trigger. So they're quite the weapon, and the USSR and the US made some very, very big ones. They're big enough to make the thing that was dropped on Hiroshima look like dynamite. So, hundreds and hundreds of times bigger - maybe thousands of times. It's been awhile since I looked into it. And then in 1962, there was the Cuban Missile Crisis - I have a good story about that. So, about ten years ago, I went down to Tucson, Arizona to a conference on consciousness there. And they have that conference fairly frequently in Tucson. It's become quite a popular conference even though it isn't clear to me that we know anything more about consciousness than we did before the conference started. And, Tucson's kind of an interesting town. It's in the middle of the desert, the cool desert, with the big sort of Saguaro road runner cactuses. But it's also extremely dry there which is, of course, what you'd expect given that it's a desert. So one of the things that Americans do with Tucson is store old fighter planes there. And so there is an airplane museum, which is an amazing place. It has maybe 500 planes including John F Kennedy's Air Force One, which is the jet that he used to zoom around the world - it didn't have a shower by the way. It's funny because on the outside it looked like a modern jet, but on the inside, it looked pretty much like it was from World War Two because 1962 is a lot closer to World War Two than it is it now, in all sorts of ways. Even the rockets that went to the moon looked like they were built by people who were using World War Two technology - they were full switches, mechanical switches, and it's pretty basic. Anyways, as well as the airport museum, which is a very interesting place - there's B-52 bombers there and all sorts of things. Those things are huge. There's also an airport graveyard where they store old fighter jets and there's a lot of old fighter jets so there's acres, and acres, and acres, and thousands and thousands of old mothballed fighter jets lined up in the desert. So that's kind of cool in a strange way, but there was one other thing down there that I went and saw which was a decommissioned nuclear missile site and it was an intercontinental ballistic missile site and those were built in the fifties and early sixties, and they were major league rockets, those things. I think the silo, cause we could go into the silo, and it was certainly farther across in diameter than this room. I would think probably twice as large as this room, so you can imagine how big a missile that would be - it's not your grandmother's missile. It's a major league piece of armament, and out on the grounds - these things were underground, deep underground, because they didn't want them to get blown up if they were bombed, so they buried them quite a long ways down and to get into it, you had to go through this massive steel door that was like a huge safe door except, you know ten times as big, and ten times as thick. Out in the yard of the nuclear missile site, there were fences with barbed wire on them of course, and there was a missile cap. It'd be the nose cone of the missile. Some of these missiles had single warheads, which were more than sufficient to demolish a city and some of them had multiple warheads, so they would shoot out into space and then come back into Earth and then they essentialy break apart or disperse into multiple missiles and then you can really bomb the hell out of whatever you were going to bomb instead of just destroying one city. And so, the nose cone was sitting out there and that was a pretty freaky looking thing, I'll tell you. Like it was big. It was about seven feet high I would think, and maybe about the same amount across. It was made of this plastic, kind of variegated plastic material that was about three-quarters of an inch thick and then it would melt off, of course, on re-entry because as I said these things shot out into space, and so that was kind of unnerving really, in a serious way. So we're at the missile site and you know, I mentioned your grandmother's missile. There was actually a reason for that. It was a bit of foreshadowing because it was a very funny place because at the front of the missile site there was sort of this museum set up, you know, and it had pictures of Reagan and Gorbachev on it because they decommissioned the missile sites when detente occurred and then when Perestroika hit, and the Soviet Union started to collapse, and so there were all these pictures of Reagan and Gorbachev from 1984 and so the museum was kind of like a time capsule of 1984, and the people who were running it were, like, retired Arizonans. And they were like your grandparents, assuming you have retired Arizonans for your grandparents. But they're real friendly and they're pretty happy to show you their nuclear missile museum and it was sort of like being in their rec room, except that it was a nuclear missile site and they were hospitable and it was weird, you know. It's like welcome to - you don't welcome people to a nuclear missile site. It's just not reasonable and so it was very disconcerting and it was disconcerting that it was locked in the 1980's and then it was disconcerting that it was friendly and hospitable and, you know they were kind of proud to show it off and happy to be there, and then when you went down into the nuclear missile silo proper - the control center, it's sort of like Star Trek, you know, from 1966 or 1967 except more primitive. I don't remember if the Star Trek control command area was modeled after the nuclear missile site control systems or if it was the other way around but I suspect it was that they were modeled after the nuclear controls but that was really 1950's - like the whole place was painted in that pastel green that, you know, late fifties and early sixties people really liked. And it had this 1950's - what would you call it - aesthetic. And you wouldn't necessarily think that a nuclear missile site would have an aesthetic but it does, and it looked like high tech 1957 technology. So they brought you into the control room and the control desk was probably - or the module or whatever you might call it - was about three times as long as this - maybe four times. It was a pretty impressive piece of machinery and the way you launch the missiles was not too secure in my humble opinion. What happened was, one guy wore the key around his neck. And then another guy wore the key around his neck. In order to launch the sites, you had to put the keys in the same time, and they were far enough apart so nobody could stretch their arms, you know, which was kind of the high-tech part of it. So, and, he had to put a key in, and you both had to turn the key for 10 seconds. Okay, so, and one thing you may know about ballistic missiles or you may not, is they're not cruise missiles. Once you set those things off, they're not coming back. They're bullets. That's what makes them ballistic. You know, if you aim a gun at someone and you shoot, and you decide halfway, when the bullet's halfway there, maybe that wasn't a good thing to do, it's a little late because you're not telling that bullet to come back. And it's the same with ballistic missiles, and those things are going a lot faster than bullets, you know, like a 22 bullet goes about the speed of sound, but a ballistic missile, that thing has to go around 7 miles a second to get out of the gravity o f the earth. Now i'm not sure they go quite that fast because that's escape velocity right, You need to do that to get out of the gravitational well. But to get out there into space, you have to be damn close to 7 miles a second. So it's a bullet, a very large bullet with a very explosive head on it going 7 miles a second. And once you turn those two keys man, that's it. There's no turning back. That's that. And so they took us through a simulated launch which still kind of, it's still an uncanny feeling remembering that, you know, because it's a hell of a thing to apprehend. And then they told us that the keys were in once. Right. So we were ten seconds away. Now they wouldn't tell us when, but we know when. It was during the cuban missile crisis. So, you know, there are a couple of times in the latter part of the 20th century, where we made it through the eye of a needle, we barely bloody well made it. And, the cuban missile crisis was one of those points. But in the early 80's, things were heating up pretty badly too. In about 1984, there was a movie that came out, called The Day After. You guys probably don't know about The Day After. But it was the most watched movie that had ever been broadcast on TV at that point. And basically what it showed was, what a city would be like, the day after the United States had been bombed into total desolation by a Soviet missile attack. And you know, it was a pretty hair raising movie. And one of the things that was quite interesting about it was that Ronald Reagan later said that he watched that movie and that was actually part of the reason that he entered into Detente talks with the Soviets. Now you know, Reagan had been basically been scaring the hell out of the Soviets. He had called them an evil empire, which the liberals weren't very happy about, but the Soviets man, they were an evil empire. There's absolutely no doubt about it. It's not obvious how many people the soviets killed, during their Communist Revolution and years following that. But the estimates range from twenty to sixty million. Now that's a lot of people. Like even if it's twenty million, that's three times as many people as were killed in the holocaust. You know, the Soviets starved six million Ukrainians in the 1930s and that was just to get warmed up. So the idea that the Soviets were an evil empire, it's like, it's a strong word, but there's absolutely no doubt that it was true and the more we learn about what happened, especially during the Stalinist period, although Lenin was no picnic. He pretty much created the Stalinist monster that followed him. The more we learn about it, the more horrible it becomes. And the Soviet system was operated, the economy fundamentally ran on slave labor, for what economy there was. What happened with Reagan in part was, first of all the soviet union was falling apart because there's just so long you can keep a sinking ship afloat. And something that big can die twenty years before it falls over. A system like that can stumble along half-gutted and still manage. And so, by the time Reagan had come along, the thing had probably pretty much burned itself out as a consequence of internal contradictions. But he ramped up american military spending to a staggering degree. And part of the idea behind that, at least that's what the Republicans would have everyone believe, and that might be true, is that they're just going to spend the Russians right into bankruptcy - and they basically did, and so that was that for the Soviet Union and it fell over in 1989 which was like, that was a good day. That was a really good day, and the weird thing is that no one saw it coming. And that was shocking. One day the Soviet Union was there and the next day, the SU was gone. And there was gone CIA analysts that said hey yea, they're about ready to crumble, you just have to blow on them and they'll fall over. It was a shock to everyone. You know, and then, it was very iffy in the aftermath whether or not it would hold. Yeltsin, who was a terrible drunkard, but actually a pretty courageous, well he was russian, you know. He was a pretty courageous guy and he faced down reestablishment by the totalitarians on a tank. You know, that was good for him because that was pretty frightening too. Anyways I'm telling you all this because when I grew up, most of the people I knew were convinced that there was no bloody way we were going to make it to the 20th century. You know, and I think, I remember discussing this with all of my friends frequently, and you know some people kind of use that as an excuse, you know like what the hell's the point, you know, we're gonna blow ourselves up anyway so i might as well drink vodka until i fall over. And you know, that's not really a particularly moral way of looking at it, but I'm telling you that there was no shortage of thinking that this was so insane that this would certainly end in absolute catastrophe. And it damn near did, like it wasn't some kind of collective delusion. You know, there were times, in fact, there was a story recently published, about a russian general who was given the order to launch the missiles. There was a mistake in reading on their display, showing that missiles were coming from north america across the poles towards russia, and he was told to launch, but he didn't. Well, good for him, but, that's a little too close. Really. And you know, there's all sorts of other crazy things that had happened during that period of time. So for example, I read this book by an ex-KGB guy who said he worked in a biological warfare lab in the soviet union. They killed a number of people by accident when some of their bugs got out, on the order of 500 people, which is a lot of people, but it's not like 250,000 people. But it's a lot of people. But what those geniuses were trying to do was cross ebola with smallpox. So small pox is unbelieveably - the combination of smallpox and ebola is extraordinarily easy to transmit and very very very fatal. And so, they were trying to cross it and then aerosolize it so you could distribute it in canisters and blow it over cities. Nice bit of scientific investigation. Perfectly reasonable scientific question - can it be done? So, you know, it was a pretty crazy period of time. And all human history - what did Dostoevsky say about human history? The one thing you can say about it is that it's not rational. The very word sticks in your throat, so it's always been crazy, and it's crazy now, but it was really crazy then. And so, we got through that, and thank god, you know, as far as I'm concerned, the world is a lot better place now than it was, well it is, thirty years ago, forty years ago, fifty years ago. Things are way better now, you know, you hear a lot of doom and gloom about how we're gonna destroy the planet, but we probably aren't. The population is gonna stabilize out at around 9 billion. We already have 7, we can handle another 2. There's gonna be some extinctions - we're eating up the ocean like insane piranha - that's mostly a fault of public policy, but it looks like we're probably gonna squeak through the century with a bit of damage and then things are gonna settle down. It's highly probable if theres anything vaguely human left in a hundred years, that the big problem will be population is rapidly decreasing. And that's already happening in european countries, it's happening in japan, it's going to happen in china. And so you know, by the year 2100, the most populous country in the world is going to be nigeria, not china. China is going to lose people like mad, because they have a one child policy. And everybody in china is getting old, so it's not going to be hyper populated. Anyways, so I was interested in all this because i had felt I'd grown up - I didn't feel like I'd grown up under its shadow - I had grown up under its shadow. It was something in the back of our minds all the time. And there was a question underneath that, a couple of them, and one was - how is this possible? How could it be that the world could divide itself up into two armed camps - hyper armed camps - tens of thousands of nuclear missiles, more than enough to wipe out the enemy many times over. I don't remember what the american arsenal peaked out, but i think it was more than fifty thousand nuclear weapons. I dont know if theres fifty thousand towns in the Soviet Union. Maybe they were gonna bomb Moscow fifty times or something, but after the first two or three, it's probably more or less irrelevant. So it was really, it was really crazy. And I don't know if you know this, but - and I believe this was during the Kennedy era, I hope I got this right. One of kennedy's genius boys came up with the - because kennedy's administration was run by a lot of harvard graduates and a lot of ivy league graduates so they were supposed to be pretty intelligent, but intelligence and wisdom are not the same thing. Anyways, they established a policy which was called Mutual Assured Destruction, which means if you hit me, I kill you, and then you kill me so it would be better if we didn't bother. And the acronym was MAD - Mutual Assured Destruction. It's like, you know just thinking about that, it's a chilling thought - it's like what horrible entity thought that up as a joke. You know you think well is that some politicians idea as wit? Where'd that come from? So thats a hell of a thing to make a joke about. MAD. Well that was right, it was definitely mad. And you know the odd thing is that we didnt blow ourselves up and we didnt have a third world war, and you can't make a solid claim the invention of nuclear weapons was necessarily the worst thing that could've happened because even the soviets who were completely insane, and of course the Maoists who were probably even worse, they weren't insane enough to start a nuclear war. Now Stalin, there's evidence - there's debate about it - but there's evidence that stalin was basically murdered, partly by Khrushchev, who was his successor. When Stalin died, Khrushchev and three other people were in his house and what happened the night stalin had died is not clear. But i read a book recently called Stalin, interestingly enough, that was written by a guy who had access to the full Communist party archives, which was a relatively new thing, and that was his conclusion. He also believed Stalin was gearing up to do an invasion of Europe, and that he didn't give a damn about how many cities would have to be bombed in order for the soviets to roll through. And Stalin, he was like that. Stalin was perfectly capable of taking entire nations of people out in Eastern Europe by train and shipping them out to Siberia in the middle of winter with nothing to eat and no tools and letting them live, which of course they didnt - and that meant women, and children, and men shorn of all their belongings and thrust out into the middle of nowhere to perish or live as they saw fit. And if they perished, so much the better, as far as Stalin was concerned. He wasn't exactly the sort of person the idea of nuclear war would necessarily stop, and it's certainly possible that's what he was hoping for because when we look at people like Stalin and Hitler, we think they're after world domination. You think in some sense that's kind of a positive motivation - not really - but it's like if you have a Corvette and someone steals it, you can think well I know why they stole it, they wanted to have the Corvette! It's an understandable motivation to want power, it's not necessarily an admirable one, but sometimes power is a perfectly reasonable thing to pursue. But, I don't have any idea why we ever assumed that those guys were after victory. You should never make the presupposition that everyone is out to win - some people are out to lose, and the more people they take with them, the better. When Hitler died, he committed suicide in a bunker way down below in Berlin, when Berlin was on fire and Europe was burning. And as far as I can tell, that was what Hitler was after from the very beginning. He was interested in fire as a purifying agent. He's a fire worshipper in some sense, because if you look at the Nuremberg gatherings of the Nazis, they were spectacular, spectacular celebrations - unbelievably dramatic and impressive, and they frequently featured fire. And fire is a purifying agent, and Hitler, by the end of WW2, he was pretty contemptuous of the Germans because they really hadn't served him well. Now, it wasn't like he thought maybe it wasn't such a good idea to start a whole second world war, because he was a little on the narcissistic side you might say. But by the time the Russians came marching in and Germany was in ruins, Hitler was perfectly happy to have the allies tromp all over the citizens, because that's what they deserved anyways. And so, that's the sort of guy he was, and so, why we would assume he wanted to win just because that's what he said is something I've never been able to understand. The kids who shot up Columbine didnt want to win, they wanted to kill as many people as possible to make a point, and then they wanted to kill themselves - just in case you didnt exactly get the point. And the point was: the more destruction, the better, and if i have to go along with it, hey no problem, that just makes me a little more serious than i'd otherwise been. Those sort of motivations are not pleasant to understand. We have enough documentation about events like that, especially the mass killings. Those guys have written down exactly why they do it. I have some excellent books on extraordinarily vengeful serial killers and mass murderers. I know exactly how they think.There's a great book on this sort of thing, if you're interested in this sort of thing called Panzram. And Carl Panzram was a serial killer and rapist who lived pretty much early in the 20th century. He was a tough, delinquency sort of kid, from a large family. When he was 13, 14, they sent him off to some reform school. It was run by the same sort of people that had run Canada's residential schools. So you know, they were basically predators on children. And of course, he was raped, and brutalized, and tormented in all sorts of horrible ways, but he was a tough guy. When he came out, he decided the human race wasn't really worth that much and that he was going to wreak as much mayhem as he possibly could for the rest of his life. He raped a thousand men. He killed dozens of people. He kept track of the dollar value of the buildings he burned down. Like, this was a serious guy. He was bent on destruction. And that's that. What were his dying words? First of all, there was a committee, I believe of women, that intervened on behalf of him, cause they were anti-capital punishment, and he said to them, if I remember correctly, that he wished the human race had one neck so he could put his hands around it and squeeze. So that was his way of pointing out to the people who didn't think that capital punishment was justified in his case, that they maybe weren't thinking clearly. Then to the hangman, he said hurry up, you hoosier bastard. I could kill ten men in the time it takes you to kill me. You don't get a statement like that from someone who isn't thoroughly committed to what he's doing. So, the situation in the world found itself involved in really had me thinking. Part of it was well, what the hell's going on with all these weapons, and how can it possibly be anyone thinks that's a reasonable solution. How did it come about that this could even occur, and what are we thinking. There's that, and there was also the why are people so damn convinced on either side of this argument that they're right enough to risk everything for - which is a perfectly good question. And then there was the malevolence issue, with how much of this was wanting to see your side win and everything to do with wanting to see everything lose. And then And then there was another issue which was, well are both sides wrong? Are both sides right? Because that's more of a cultural relativist approach because yeah, yeah, the Communists believe one thing and the bloody capitalists believe another and they're just as bad. Who believes what is completely arbitrary because belief systems are arbitrary, and so maybe they're both right or they're both wrong. I thought well, either of those conclusions were pretty damn dismal because well, if they're both right, what are you gonna do? Have them talk it out? I don't think so. And if they're both wrong, that's not much better. And then if one's right and the other's wrong - well does that mean anything? Like is it possible for one belief system to be more right than another belief system because of course, that's certainly not a tenet of moral relativism, and you might think of that as the standard intellectual approach to morality, and has been for the past hundred years. I think, by the way, that that's a reprehensible morality. I'll tell you why, as we move through the course because one of the things I tried to find out was was what we were fighting for - assuming you give the West a bit of a benefit of the doubt and assume that some of the things we stand for, we actually stand for and we aren't just posturing, parading - grounded in anything? Or was it just arbitrary opinion? So, that's what we're going to talk about. We're going to talk about why people believe the things they believe. What psychological function does belief perform. We're going to talk about malevolence. As far as I can tell, malevolence is the willingness to do evil, and I think the best definition of evil - and I've thought about this for a long time, like what constitutes evil, and it's complicated - but I think if you want a one line summary, it's the desire to do harm for the sake of the harm. So you have to think about it as a kind of art form. Look. If you have a terrorist and you think he's hidden an atom bomb in the stadium, and you think well, he's not gonna tell me - you have good evidence - he's not gonna tell me unless I torture him. I don't think you should torture him because torture is wrong. But you know, if you do that and you really believe he's hidden an atom bomb in a stadium, at least you have some justification for what you're doing and it's not necessarily that what you're doing is evil - it might be wrong. It might be misguided. But who's to say in such a situation as that. It certainly should be illegal. But at least you can say there's a plausible explanation for it, but lots of situations where there's absolute horror, there's no plausible explanation for whatsoever. I can give you an example. One of the things that used to happen in Auschwitz, if i remember correctly - Auschwitz, I don't know what you guys envision when you guys envision concentration camps. Concentration camp, it's a funny name first of all because it's not really a camp. You know what i mean, but a concentration camp isn't like a prison. Thats easy to envision them like a prison. Those bloody things were cities. They had tens of thousands of people in them. They were massive. At least, they were large towns. So these were very big places. Anyways, at the typical concentration camp, the trains would come rolling in and of course people had been packed into the damn trains, well, worse than animals. They'd be packed standing, and lots of people just died in the cars, especially if they were old or little or had some respiratory problems or something like that because they would overheat if they were cramped in the middle of people or they would freeze to death along the outside because they would freeze against the wood. But that was okay, it just made the job easier when they finally landed at Auschwitz. And then, once they were in Auschwitz, the guards would play tricks on them. One trick would be to get some poor son of a bitch, who'd you know, been torn away from his country, who had his family destroyed, who knew where he was going, who was half dead for six different reasons. Maybe he didn't even speak, or she didn't even speak that was most common there, guarded by absolutely ruthless barbarians who wanted to do nothing else but make people as miserable as possible in the most creative possible ways. And so, what they would do was, some of the prisoners, they would give them wet sacks of salt - and so those weighed about a hundred pounds - and they'd have them carry from one side of the compound to the other. Well, that's not so bad, when you're really, really innovative in your capacity to perpetrate evil, and the next thing they made them did was carry them back. You think about that, you know, and this is something you have to understand if you really want to understand evil is that it's an aesthetic, it's an art form. The reason that was such a terrible torture was, well partly because these people were already ruined, and a hundred pounds is a lot of salt, and maybe it was winter and they didn't have any shoes, and - you know, like it was just brutal labor. But Solzhenitsyn, when he wrote about the Gulag Archipelago, he said, you know even if you were a prisoner and they were having you build a wall, you could at least take some damn pride in building the wall. You could lay some bricks out, and you could say well this suck and it's really horrible and everything but you know, I built a straight wall. That's something. But if you have to take a sack of wet salt from one side of the compound and then carry it back, the net consequence of that is zero. It's zero. And of course, the famous sign on the outside of the concentration camps were Work will set you free. Right? Now that's another joke. It's like mutual assured Destruction, and the only way you could - a joke like that is satanic. There's no other way to think about it. A joke like that comes out of the deepest depths of human malevolence. Then the work that sets you free, it wasn't even work. It was a parody of work. And the purpose of the work was to destroy you, but not quickly because that's not as terrible as destroying you slowly. So these are very very terrible things. Part of what I thought about in relation to people's belief systems was people are territorial. Chimps - I don't know if you know this or not - chimps basically go to war. Jane Goodall discovered that a couple of decades ago and it really, really was hard on her because she was kind of a Rousseauian. For those of you who don't know, Jean Jacques Rousseau was a French philosopher and French philosophers have an awful lot of sins on their conscience and Rousseau was certainly one of them because Rousseau was the first fully articulate promoter of the idea that human beings were basically good. So we had a good soul in a moral sense, but we were corrupted by our social institutions. So, as far as Rousseau is concerned, it was kind of a noble savage idea. Like the human being in their raw form has a pure soul and then you give them to parents, and you give them to teachers, and they get into politics, then there's group disputes and they get all corrupted. Well that's it. I don't even know what else to say about that except that it's absolutely moronic, but it's an appealing proposition if you're a naive optimist. I mean, first of all, it doesn't explain where malevolence comes from because the people created the institutions, so it just puts you into an infinite regress. Chicken and egg. If the institutions are reprehensible but the people who built them aren't, then where did the reprehensible elements of the institution come from? He might think thats its an auto generating consequence of organizing people, but you know it's a pretty specious theory. Of course he had a counterpart, a philosophical counterpart, Thomas Hobbes and Hobbes said basically exactly the opposite, that people were vicious and cruel, and unless you put them in straitjackets - fundamentally - and made them obey, everything was going to go immediately to hell. And when you saw what happened in Iran when the Americans waltzed in, and then the power structure disintegrated, it was a hell of a lot more like Hobbes than Rousseau. You took out the tyrant at the top and it wasn't like everyone got all peaceful and loving all of a sudden. It was like absolute chaos reigned. Of course, you can rationalize that. Anyways, Rousseau had five children by a maid - an illiteral maid - that was his mistress, and he put every single one of them in orphanages, and of course they perished because orphanages at Rousseau's time were not exactly a luxury resort. Even up until the beginning of the 20th century, who were under one years of age, who were in care institutions die, partly disease and that sort of thing. But partly because they weren't touched, cared for physical, even if they were fed. And 200 years ago, they weren't even fed. Anyways, nonetheless, people maintained the optimistic idea that human beings were basically good and were corrupted by institution. It's a very common idea in universities. University people are always complaining about the corrupt nature about this institution, and that institution, while they sit here in the warmth with the electricity on. It's surrounded by wealth that characterizes maybe one tenth of one percent of the entire world's population, and they complained about how oppressed they are and how nasty the institutions are. Well, you know you actually haven't been to a nasty institution because they get pretty damn bad. Most of the institutions in the world are like that. So, it isn't exactly clear that people are pristine in their heart and corrupted by institutions, although I'm sure that happened. It happened with Panzram for example. Anyways, this has been a line of philosophical speculation that's - I would say, constituted one of the unspoken fundamental assumptions of Western intellectuals in particular. Jane Goodall thought, in many ways, the same way. She thought chimps were basically animals, they're okay. They co-exist relatively peacefully with one another. Even Carl Rogers - who I talk about a bit in my Personality class - he thought that people were basically fundamentally good and that institutions made them bad. But the problem is, you look at chimps and they're a fair bit like us. Bonobos - you can look at them too, they're genetically quite related to us, so we're a weird mixture of the two. But chimps, like those things, there is no evidence that they really have any internal control over their aggression at all. There was a horrible case about two years ago, where a woman was interacting with a chimp and it tore her to pieces, and they can do that. It took her face right off, and they have about the strength of six men. An adult male chimp can break a three hundred pound test cable. Those things are really, really strong, and they're not friendly. So in Arnhem zoo for example, there has been a troop of chimps there that have been followed by an extremely brilliant primatologist named Frans de Waal, whose work I would very highly recommend. De Waal is a very smart guy, and he's looked at the origins of morality in chimpanzees, from you know, a biological perspective. It's very, very nice work - very, very clear-headed. But you know, he's recounted absolutely horrific stories about chimpanzee behavior. One of the stories he talked about, for example, was you kind of have this idea that there's a male chimp hierarchy. It's roughly true - there's a female hierarchy too, but the males in the chimp world anyways, tend to be the dominant ones. You know, you kind of think of a dominant primate as a prize fighter. He's ruling because of his physical prowess. Now that turns out not to exactly be true. In this particular case, the guy who was running the chimp troop was a bit of a bully, and he wasn't making any friends. That's not such a good idea because no matter how tough you are by yourself, two weaker guys can probably take you out, and that's what happened during Frans de Waal's observations. Two chimps attacked the leader. They had a coalition, they were grooming each other, they were pals. And chimps are pretty good at remembering reciprocal relationships, and having friendships. They have a very highly social structure. They just tore him apart. The things they did to him, like you don't even want to know about. So chimps really have no upper limit on their capacity for aggression. And when they hunt, because chimps hunt, they like meat - they often hunt Colobus monkeys, and they weight about 35 pounds. A Colobus monkey is a major league animal, and they eat those things alive. And they scream while they're being killed, and that does not slow the chimps down one bit. So it's not obvious the chimp is really a creature of a lot of empathy - especially the males. The females are likely more empathetic because they have to deal with infants for long periods of time. What seems to inhibit the aggression of male chimps isn't anything they hold internally. It seems that when they get hyper aggressive in the troop, the troop gets more and more agitated and basically shuts them down. So you can imagine maybe you're in a rough bar, and some dingbat who's half-psychopathic and has had two pints of alcohol, is starting to cause a tremendous amount of trouble. He's not going to shut himself down, but the rest of the troop might. And that kind of means the control over the aggression is externalized. It's not a consequence of superego control. We like to think that we control our own aggression, but I'm not so sure about that. If you read things like - there's a great book, a horrifying book published about twenty years ago called the Rape of Nanking, which is - the woman who wrote it committed suicide and that suffices to tell you what the Rape of Nanking was all about. It's a story about the Japanese in WW2 going into a Chinese city called Nanking where, I believe, about 350,000 people were killed. The Nazis in that story were the good guys, so you can imagine the kind of brutality that was going on there. But, there's absolutely, perfectly well documented evidence that the Japanese soldiers engaged in competitive brutality. So really what happened was the Japanese had been pretty militarized by World War II, and they adopted a Prussian education system. The Prussians and Germans, pre 20th century Germans, were basically interested in educating obedient soldiers because it was a militaristic culture. The Japanese kind of adopted that because they were pretty sick of being kicked around by the Europeans - pretty successfully because they defeated the Russians in the early stages of the 20th century. It was quite a shock to everyone in Europe, and a cause for great celebration in Japan. Anyways, they militarized the hell out of their young men, and taught them basically that the Japanese were a master race, and that other people were subhuman. It's a very common human way of thinking, by the way. I would say it's really the default way human tribes think about other tribes. I mean, it's a little more complicated than that because human tribes tend to trade with other tribes. So it's not all demonization, but a lot of it is. If you look around the world in the anthropological literature, what you see is that the names that most tribes have for themselves is something like The Human Beings, or The People, indicating that the rest of the people aren't really people. They're barbarians, or you know. They live out where the sun is being eaten by the dragon of the night. The word barbarian is a word that comes from the Greeks making fun of how non-Greeks spoke. They thought they went bar bar bar bar bar, something like that. So anyways, what Goodall found was that the chimps - the chimp adolescents in particular, particularly the males - would patrol the borders of their territory in groups of three or four, often with a female or two. But the females didn't seem to be really the - they were more part of the group rather than the initiators. But what the chimps would do is if they found a chimp from another troop, even if that was a chimp that had moved from their troop in the not too distant past and joined another, cause sometimes the males leave and they go to other troops. If they outnumbered them, they would tear them to pieces. It looked like that was why they were doing the border patrol. They're out looking for trouble. They're gangs, roughly speaking, and they were looking for trouble. But the point of it is that - and they would only attack if they outnumbered because chimps can, I wouldn't say they can count, but they have a rudimentary notion of group size. i don't think you can count without being able to verbalize, but you can estimate at a glance. So when I say tear apart, that's exactly what I mean. There's no upper limit on the brutality. So Goodall discovered that first, and she didn't tell anybody about it. Now she had a reason. Some of them might think we're ideological - oh the lovely chimps, and fair enough. But some of it was also that she thought that maybe the chimps had been corrupted as a consequence of their contact with human beings and their natural behavior had been somehow transformed. And that's not - it's reasonable to be cautious as a scientist before you go out and say hey chimps go to war. Isn't that revolutionary, because it is. It just ends the idea that our war-like, malevolent nature is just a function of culture. Like if chimps do it, well what are they perverted by their own culture? I don't think so. I mean there are more and less violent chimp cultures, and there's more and less violent baboon cultures. There's some culture variance, but since Goodall's time, this sort of behavior has been documented on many, many chimp troops. So that's us, in a nutshell. It's not self evident if you put the typical adolescent male, who's not a very well formulated personality, and you know - because he's not that individual and he hasn't seen much of the world. The typical guy who goes into the army is kind of on the margins of society. Maybe he's not particularly bright. I'm not trying to be insulting by that, but it's not exactly a high end job. You put someone like that in a place where there's no rules. It's like who leads where there are no rules? Well the probability that it's the friendliest and nicest people is very, very low. So what seemed to happen in Nanking was the Japanese soldiers took their cues from the people with the most brutal imaginations People can have pretty brutal imaginations, especially when they start to compete. So, I was interested in that. What exactly was at the core of that malevolence. I think it's uniquely human. The chimps would go and tear apart, but basically they're just going to kill them. That's their goal, and maybe it might take awhile, but it's not going to take four weeks whereas if you're a human being, you can draw out your enemy's death for a very, very long. Part of that is the desire to produce the misery and suffering that's attended on the death. Only human beings have the imagination to do that. That's why I think in the book of Genesis where people's eyes are open and they become self conscious, they also learn the difference between good and evil. Once your eyes are open and you know what you're like, once you know you're naked and vulnerable, you can exploit that in other people. Only human beings have that kind of knowledge. So the fact that we know we can be hurt makes us particularly dangerous because if I know how I can be hurt, I sure know how you can be hurt. So it's a nasty situation. I'm kind of interested in the motivation for that. You look at the Columbine kids, for example, and the mayhem they produced was trivial to the mayhem they were planning. If it was up to those two guys, they would have bombed Detroit flat. They had visions of exactly that. And it was a media spectacular, and they didnt do it because they were poor kids in some sense who were bullied. That is an idiotic explanation. It's not true. Everybody is a bloody outsider. I'm sure there isn't a single one of you who doesn't have a memory from junior high where you were an outcast in one way or another. Maybe some of you weren't, but it's very, very common. To think of that as sufficient motivation to shoot people cold bloodedly in a high school - sorry, that's a little on the naive side. So I'm very, very interested in what makes up that motivation because malevolence plus nuclear weapons isn't a very good combination. It doesn't look to me that we can afford that unconscious malevolence anymore because we're just too powerful, and if the wrong person ends up being like that with the wrong weapons, it's like game over. I've also become convinced while I'd been looking through this that the problem that we're discussing is not a sociological problem, or a political problem, or an economic problem because a lot of what you read - and a lot of political scientists will tell you this sort of thing because they're basically closet Marxists - is that they'll tell you the reason for struggle between nations is economic. I think that's absurd, not because it isn't true, but because it doesn't actually address a more fundamental issue which is okay, economic struggle is a struggle about who has access to what's valued. But, there's nothing self evident about what's value. That's the problem. It's like you have the idea of natural resource. Oil is not a natural resource until you have an automobile. The interplay between cultural value structures and what constitutes a natural resource is so tightly put together - except for maybe air and water - that saying there are natural resources which means things of intrinsic value, and that's what people fight over. Well, you've made the mystery disappear inside the word natural resource. You haven't solved anything. Well the question is why would people fight over things that they value? Well because there's all sorts of things you can value, like peace. So, it's not a sufficient explanation and it's also not clear to me people's primary motivations are economic. Well it's not trivial, but I would say the motivation isn't really economic. It's more related to dominance hierarchy position, and that's fundamentally a sexual motivation especially for men because if men are higher up the dominance hierarchy, women are more attracted to them. So you could say that's economic. I don't think it is. Economic is just a secondary consequence of that. I don't believe, by the way, that's a theory because there's excellent documentation on hyper aggression in adolescent males, and the best evidence suggests that adolescent males become hyper aggressive when you put them in situations where they can't win. Then they become hyper aggressive and attempt to formulate a dominance hierarchy so that some of them can rise to the top and basically be attractive. So you can call that economic if you want, but I think you're pushing your luck with that sort of explanation. Well, so that's basically the background. So, when I was investigating this, I first started studying political science and I actually liked that quite a bit in the first couple years because I was basically reading political philosophy. It's actually worthwhile reading great political philosophers because A - they could think - and B - you think like they think even if you don't know it because one of the hallmarks of a great philosopher is that his ideas or her ideas sink into the culture so deeply that a hundred years after they were written, they think they've always thought that way. That's one of the things that's happened to Freud. One of the things people understand is that theres an unconscious and that's its motivated by sexual drive. It's like what's so brilliant about that? Yeah, well it's obvious once Freud points it out. So anyways, I started - I took political science and literature which I also found was extremely useful because great literary people have great things to say. Like Dostoevsky's novels absolutely flatten me. He's so brilliant and I've never read anyone who takes moral question so seriously. For example, if you look at Crime and Punishment, which is a book I would highly recommend, Dostoevsky is an absolute model of a true intellectual. I say that because in Crime and Punishment, for example, Dostoevsky had this character named Raskolnikov, and you guys can identify with Raskolnikov because he's a university student and he's your age. Now he's having a rough time because he's in St. Petersburg and he doesn't have any money and he lives in this tiny little room which basically has a bunch of clothes on the bed which he sleeps in, and he's basically starving to death. He only has bread to eat, and he's a law student. So he's having a rough time. St. Petersburg at the end of the 19th century is kind of a rough place. Some of you guys probably have it pretty bad, but Raskolnikov kind of had it pretty bad. And so, he's half starved and half delirious. Also, his ideas are very addled because he's one of the first Russians who really considered himself an Atheist. Russia was a medieval society until the late 1900's. It was sort of like Quebec before 1960. Students' laughter I'm serious about that, because Quebec was basically the last European country, so to speak, that underwent a secularization, and that happened in about 1960. Quebec families went from an average size of about 12 to 13 to about 1.2. Lowest birth rate in the world. And all the Quebecois were married, and none of them are now, and they were all Catholic, hardly any of them are now. It was an overnight transformation. That's partly what fed Quebec nationalism. There was actually a study that was released by the Gallup organization. I've only heard it referred to in one meeting where they indicated if you were a lapsed Catholic in Quebec, you were ten times more likely to be a separatist. That's really worth thinking about right, because religion just collapses and nationalism just rises up to take its place because you need a bloody belief structure because, what are you gonna do? Wander around aimlessly? That's not fun. It's not useful. So, you just jump from one structure of belief to another, or you fall apart. So that's also something very much worth knowing. Anyways, Raskolnikov, he thinks he's a pretty educated guy and thinks he's pretty smart, and he is pretty smart but he's like smart arrogant, not smart wise because he's 21. What the hell does he know? He doesn't know anything, but he's smart. He's contemptuous about other people because he's probably smarter than most of them and he confuses that with knowing what's going on. He lives in this little horrible apartment, and he has a really horrible landlady - this is where Dostoevsky is a genius - like Raskolnikov hates his landlady, and Dostoevsky tells you why. Then you think well yeah, I'd hate her too. So, she's miserable. She owns a bunch of apartments. She charges too much rent for them. She tortures all the people that rent from her in every possible way she can. The places are filthy. She doesn't provide any furniture. She hoards money, and doesn't do anything with it, so she lives in absolute poverty and filth. She's a cruel person in every possible way. Plus she has a niece who isn't very bright, and she basically treats her like a slave. So, she's not doing anyone any good. That's Raskolnikov's idea. And then, he gets a letter from his mother and his mother basically tells him that his sister's going to go marry this rich guy because she's in love with him, and that'll solve all of his monetary problems so he could keep going to law school. But he reads between the lines and he realizes pretty quickly that this rich guy is a real miserly scum rat, and he's gonna treat his sister and his mother absolutely miserably, and his sister doesn't really love him anyways, and the only reason she was marrying him is so Raskolnikov can go to school. So he's not very happy with that, and fair enough. You can understand his motivation. So he's starving and he's full of these ideas and they're also sort of Nietzschean. Like Atheistic ideas hit Russia really hard because it went from seriously orthodox Christian in every possible way to unbelievably skeptical in one generation. It just fractured the society. It's partly why Communism became so absolutely attractive for the Russians, and Dostoevsky also details that extremely brilliantly in the book called The Possessed or The Devil's. It's a wonderful book. It's hard to get into, you have to read about 200 pages before it really kicks in, but Russian novels are sort of like that. So anyways, Raskolnikov is thinking these sort of super man-ish, rationalistic ideas, and he thinks, well you know there's no evidence that there's any real moral hierarchy. And you can easily make a case that the reason that people aren't really moral, they're just cowardly - and this is a Nietzschean observation. Most of what you'd call your morality isn't morality at all. It's just you're too afraid to do what you want, and because you're too weasly to admit that, you say you don't do those things because it isn't moral. But it isn't true. You'd love to do them if you were brave enough, but you aren't. So people misread that to say what Nietzsche thought that all morality was cowardice. That isn't what he thought. He thought all cowardice masqueraded as morality. That's a whole different thing. So anyways, Raskolnikov is thinking about these things. He's thinking, well I can be lawyer. I can be a good one. I'd help people. I'd help the poor people. What the hell good is it for me to wander around starving like this. It doesn't seem reasonable. My sister's basically going to go prostitute herself for this rich guy, and that sucks. There's my landlady and she's an absolutely reprehensible creature and everyone agrees, and she's old and worn out. And she has this person she keeps as a slave. Maybe I should just get rid of her. What I love about that is that - like this happens almost all the time in universities, I would say. Whenever you hear people who think they're smart having a discussion. What they generally do is that they have an idea, and then they have an idea about the person who has a different idea. The idea about the person who has the different idea is that their idea is stupid. So what they do is produce a caricature of that person's idea, and then they blast it. Then they think, wow I've won that argument. Which is really - it's pathetic. It's a strawman argument. It's a sign of a weak mind. What you do if you really want to have an argument with someone is you help them. Let's say you're a right winger and you're arguing with a left winger, or you're left winger and you're arguing with a right winger. It's like, you want to make their argument as magnificent as you possibly can, and then see if you can undermine it. That's what you do because then you're getting somewhere. Like any idiot can make a strawman and light it. Dostoevsky never does that. He makes the people - like when he sets up two ideas to go to war, he embodies both sets of ideas in the most powerful characters he can imagine. So in The Brothers Karamazov, for example, the two people, the two protagonists basically - there's a bunch of them - but basically one of them is named Ilyusha, and the other is named Ivan. And Ilyusha is kind of an innocent guy. A good guy fundamentally, a little on the naive side. Religious, but not in the way that he can defend. It's more like a natural expression spirit, and he's in a monastery, and he's a follower of this famous monk. He's kind of into Orthodox Christianity in his benevolent and sincere way. But he's not much of an intellect. And Ivan, his older brother, he's good looking and tall. I believe he's a soldier. He's an impressive guy, and he's got a viciously cutting intellect. He just tears Ilyusha apart every chance he gets, across the whole book. You can see two parts of Dostoevsky fighting it out in the book because part of Dostoevsky was highly spiritualized, not least because he was epileptic and that often - for reasons we'll talk about later - that often exaggerates spirituality. Also because he was a deeply spiritual person and also a tremendous intellect. And so, he was at war inside and he put those parts of him out into these characters, and let them just go at it. It's brilliant, you know. Ivan makes the best argument for Atheism that's ever been written. It's really powerful. He talks about all these terrible things that were being done to children in Russia at the turn of the century, back in the late 1800's. He talks about this one situation where the parents of this one girl locked her in a freezing outhouse overnight. She was crying and screaming, and telling them that she was sorry. And they just left her in there and she froze to death. It was like front page news in Russia at the time, maybe in Moscow, or maybe in St. Petersburg. Dostoevsky lifted that argument and he said to - he had Ivan ask Ilyusha, well this is the sort of thing God permits? He said the whole damn world isn't worth that. The suffering of one child in a situation like that. How can you possibly see that something like that can exist and wander around with your boneheaded belief and a benevolent god? Would you lock a girl in an outhouse and let her freeze? If that meant other people would be happy? And of course Ilyusha says, no I would never do that. So Ivan tells him that, yeah you wouldn't do that but this god you imagine exists would be perfectly pleased to let something like that occur. And you know Ilyusha has no idea what to say about that. That's just a fragment of Ivan's argument. He's like punching at him like mad. I think the way Ilyusha basically responds is by trying to live a good life. He can't argue. Ivan's better at it than he is, plus there's this vicious strain of critical thinking about religion that's being wafted in from Western Europe. There's 300 years of philosophical force behind it, and Ivan is its mouthpiece. It's like Ilyusha and Russia itself is just blown apart by that. They have no defense against that. The bloody Western Europeans had 300 years to get used to it. The Russians had like ten years. It just fragmented them. They were like waiting for the new Messiah, and they sure got one. Both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche prophesied about what happened to Russia forty years before it happened. That's bloody amazing. To think you could look that far into the future and actually get it right. I mean, things didn't change quite as fast there as they are now, but you know, it wasn't like the Victoria times were static. There were a lot of things going on. To get that right over four decades - those guys were in touch with something very deep that was going on underneath the substrata of Western civilization. Alright, so I'm thinking about belief structures and I'm thinking about malevolence and I'm think about the psychological role that these sorts of things are playing because it occurred to me at some point, something like - an idea something like this. This actually tormented me for about six months. I would say, when I had been thinking these things through - I would say about five years at this point - I was really obsessed by it. I was thinking about this literally every minute of the day, from the time I woke up till the time I went to sleep. It was really manic, probably. At one point I got to this conclusion. I thought, okay well here's the situation. It's pretty obvious that people need belief structures because first of all a belief structure orients them to action so you have to believe that one thing is more valuable than other to just act. So, why did the chicken cross the road? Well because he thought the other side of the road was better than the side he was on, obviously. Students' laughter You know, because whenever you're moving, the implicit hypothesis of your movement is that the thing you're moving towards is better than the thing you're leaving, unless you're self destructive because otherwise, why bother? So what that means is that you don't move without a value structure, and you don't get to not have one. You might say, well I don't believe in anything. It's like, well, you say you don't believe in anything, so technically you can't make an argument for what you believe or you don't know what you believe. But if you're not just sitting there, vegetating, then you believe something otherwise - you act it out. You have to have a belief system or you fall apart. So you're nihilistic or depressed or hopeless. That's certainly - like who wants that? That's not good. It's painful. Depression is no joke. I know someone who had a very serious illness. It was an illness that destroyed part of this person's body. It destroyed their joints, and they also had clinical depression. I asked this person at one point - okay, you get to have a choice. You get to get rid of the illness that's destroying your joints, so they had to be replaced, or you could get rid of the depression. He said, I'd get rid of the depression first, no problem. So that's worth thinking about. If you believe nothing, and you're hopeless and you've got no value structure, the place you end up is not good. And I'm sure lots of you have experienced that. I mean most people - especially the people who are more likely to come to this class - most people, by the time they're your age, have gone through a dark period or two for whatever reason. Relationship breaks up or maybe you lose the meaning in your life or someone betrays you or someone gets sick or you get sick or, you know, some tragedy comes along and knocks you flat. You think, what the hell, what's going on? Why isn't any of this worthwhile? And it's a good questions, but you can't go there because that's like death. Then the other problem is, let's say you do have a belief system. Alright, so what happens if I have a different one? What are we supposed to do about that? You can't give up yours cause then you're done. I'm not gonna give up mine for the same reason. But it isn't clear that we can inhabit the same part of the Earth peacefully if we don't believe the same things. So I - when I sorted that all out, I thought well that's it man. We're basically - that's it. We're done. We can't not have a belief system, and if you have one, you can't not fight. We're too well armed to fight now. We're not just going to collapse into nihilism, although that happens quite a bit. So, game's over. Well, it turned out that that was wrong, thank god, but it took me an awful long time to even begin to understand how that could possibly be wrong because as far as I could tell, those were the options. So another thing we're gonna try to figure out is not only exactly why people have belief systems, exactly what a belief system is, and why they compete, and why you can't just get rid of them. But, we're also gonna figure out what it is that you might be able to do about the fact that you're going to inhabit places with people who don't have exactly the same belief systems as you. And in some sense, it's really a problem of social being, right? And creatures have been trying to solve this problem ever since, well we don't know how long. I like to use lobsters as an example because lobsters arrange themselves into dominance hierarchies, and they have very complex social behavior. They don't have much of a brain. So you can have pretty damn complex social behavior without having much of a brain. Lobsters have been around for around 400 million years. So us, roughly speaking, since we had a shared ancestor with the lobster a very long time ago, we've been trying to figure out how to coexist with other creatures that don't precisely share our belief systems for 400 million years. And we've been sufficiently successful about it so that we're both social, and here we are. So obviously, there's ways that it can be dealt with; although I think we don't necessarily understand them very well. I didn't want to just understand what it was about belief systems, you know, about their necessity and their function, and the way the become pathologist. I wanted to figure out if there's also a pattern to the processes by which belief systems are modified and negotiated so that belief systems that have different structures can coexist in the same place peacefully. It's a vital question right? Because most of you are going to get married, successfully or unsuccessfully. And even if you don't, you're going to live with someone for a long period of time, and you're going to find out they're not like you, and that's extremely annoying. But, what are you gonna do? You're either going to be a slave, or a tyrant, or you're going to negotiate because those are your options. And negotiation is extraordinarily difficult because you have to figure out what you want, and you probably won't even admit it, and second of all you have to listen to your stupid partner about what they want. Then you have to try to figure out how to make both of them possible. Well, slavery, tyranny; that's comparatively easy from a cognitive perspective, compared to actually trying to figure how you can be mutually satisfied in the same space, but you can do it. That's the thing. There is a process, and it's identifiable. So I want to talk to you about belief systems and their psychological significance. What they're like. What function they can perform, but I also want to talk to you about how they transform because they do right? They change, especially with humans. So they can change - that means they can modify. And that means, at least in principle, that we could have a dialogue. Now dialogues, that's rough, but the alternative is war. That's partly why you're supposed to listen to your enemy because if you don't listen to your enemy, the only other thing you can do is fight with them. That's it. Student asks: You talked about how belief systems can often modify, so they can be close together. Isn't that what political perspectives basically is? You mean it's the desire for that to happen. Well, I would say it's partly the desire for that to happen. Thing is, whenever I look at a political movement, especially an ideological group, I think okay, there's a bunch of things you're for. Fine. What are you against? Because one of the things about people that have adopted ideological positions like to presume is that all of the right is on their side. That makes them very unconscious of their shadow, from the Jungian perspective. The Nazis had all sorts of positive reasons for what they're doing, but the negative reasons were there too, and you could easily make it a case that the negative reasons were really the reasons. When I look at ideologues, I always think, yeah yeah that's what you're for, but I don't really think all the good people are on your side. And B - I know that negative motivations are more powerful than positive ones. So you say you're for things, but you're against them too, so let's start with that. I started thinking about this after I'd read George Orwell. I love George Orwell, by the way. How many of you know who George Orwell is? Wow, really? That's impressive. How many don't? Okay, well that's good. That's amazing. How the hell did you learn about George Orwell? Is it 1984? Animal Farm? Students answer: Animal Farm. Okay, okay, well that's good because George Orwell - I tell you - George Orwell was the first Western intellectual who figured out what the hell was going on in the Soviet Union. And he did that in the mid forties, early. It was complicated because we sort of knew what was happening in the twenties and the thirties. There was Lenin, and that wasn't so good. There was the Russian civil war. There was the idea of universal Communism, that wasn't such a good idea, for as far as people who didn't want to become Communists were concerned. And then there was what happened in the Ukraine in the 1930's. The evidence was starting to pile up, but unfortunately what happened was the Spanish Civil War, and the lefties were pretty much the good guys in the Spanish Civil War. It was like a microcosm of the second world war. The lefties were fighting the fascists, and some of the lefties were Communists, but some of them, I think, were people genuinely fighting for freedom. A lot of North American literary figures went to Spain to fight on the side of the - against the fascists. And so fair enough, the fascists were obviously reprehensible, clearly. So that kind of muddied the water, right, because the fascists were bad and that sort of means the people that are fighting them are good, and some of them are Communists. There was pretty good reason for people to be radically socialist at that point in human history because the plight of the working man was relatively unpleasant. George Orwell wrote a book called The Road to Wigan Pier, and he went up to this town, that was a coal mining town and just looked at their life. So here's part of their life. So, you basically work a seven and a half hour shift when you're a coal miner, and you think oh that's not too bad by 1930 standards, and it's like yeah except you have to go down to the coal mine tunnels and they're not eight feet high and carpeted. They're like four and a half feet high and rough, and poorly lit, and the air is terrible. So basically, you have to chimp walk or crawl, up to three miles, just to get to work. And then you'd have to do that at end of your shift, and you don't get paid for that. That's just your commute. Then of course what you're doing when you get there is it's absolutely filthy. It's unbelievably noisy and brutally difficult. Coal miners, they had no teeth, but their bodies were absolutely perfect. They were unbelievably powerful and strong because all they did was incredibly intense physical labor. It was bloody rough. And the housing most people had, it's like fifty families for one outhouse. That's probably good enough to describe it. Often they were row houses, and the row houses had no back doors. They had no paths between them, and all the outhouses were at the back. So, that meant if it was twenty below and it was the winter, and you were sick then you'd get to go all the way around your block to get to the damn outhouse and maybe there was only one there, and you'd line up with fifty people so that - you know. Orwell, he was an upper class guy basically, and he was trying to help himself overcome his upper class prejudices. He was a real, documentarian of the terrible working conditions of working class people. He wrote this book called Road to Wigan Pier but one of the things that Orwell said - he wrote this story about these poor god damn coal miners, it's like yeah how about some social legislation so that these people and their children aren't absolutely brutalized nonstop. But then he wrote the last half of the book and he wrote it for the Left Book Club which was a socialist group that would publish a book every month or so. What he did was, he wrote a critique of socialism - of British socialism, and he said yeah this sucks man. It's like we should be on the side of the working people, but the socialists I meet, they're not on the side of the working people. They're like tweed wearing middle class hyper intellectuals who never go anywhere near the working class because of their class prejudices and for all sorts of other reasons. And they don't like the poor at all, they just hate the rich. I thought - I had been a member of the NDP for a long time at that point and there's always something a little off about it, especially the radical end like what's with you guys? It doesn't look like benevolence as far as I can tell. There's a lot of whining and complaining and resentment. What's that about? I read Orwell, and I thought aha! Right. If you hate the successful, if you hate the rich - rich by the way is whoever has more money than you, but that's how you define rich - and the best way to mask your resentment is to pretend you're on the side of poor. And I read that and thought, that's exactly right. That's also what made me psychoanalytically oriented because one thing psychoanalysts always do, always, is if you say you're - here's how I'm positively predisposed, the psychoanalyst says, how are you using that to mask something easy and malevolent you're doing? And that's a very very useful question. It's not always correct, but it's correct a lot more than people generally like to think. You know, it's like the mother - or the witch - in Hansel and Gretel. You know this story right? This guy gets married. He's got a couple of kids, and his new wife doesn't really like the kids. You have a hundred times higher chance, by the way, of being abused by a stepparent than by a biological parent - just so you know. So the stepmother doesn't like the kids. She tells the guy, well why don't you just put those kids out in the woods. So out they go, out in the woods. So they're lost kids, right, they have nowhere to go. So they're wandering out there in the forest. What happens? They come across a gingerbread house. You think wow, you're a starving kid. Gingerbread house, that's good news right. Not only is it a house, but it's made out of candy! How could anything be possibly any better? So in they go. Well and then there's this grandmotherly type there and she starts to fatten them up. She puts, I think it's Hansel, in a cage. She gets Gretel, after a while, to basically work as their scullery maid and it becomes quite obvious to the children that she's actually fattening them up so she can put them in the oven and eat them. And so, I think what Hansel does is I think Gretel gives him like this bone from some animal and the old witch is half blind, and every time she reaches in to sort of reach his leg, he gives her the bone and so she's just not all that interested in eating him. Anyway, the kids end up pushing her in the oven and closing it, and getting the hell out of there. So you know it's a happy ending, as far as fairy tales go. But it's an Oedipal story, right? It's a classic story, but an Oedipal family. Be bloody wary of people who do too much for you. Right. It's like if you have a mother, or any other relative for that matter who's fattening you up on mercy and candy, the probability that her basic goal is to eat you enough so that you never leave - the probability is extraordinarily high. And that's no joke. You know, one of the things that you do learn if you read about the sorts of people who burst out of their mother's basement and go shoot up Dawson College is often that's exactly the situation they've been in. They're burning with resentment in their uselessness down in the basement for five or six year. They don't have to leave. They don't have to become independent. Everything's done for them, so they never have to do anything for themselves. It's not pretty, and so one of the rules for dealing with people - and I know this is actually a rule for dealing with elderly people in hopes for retired people - is that do not do anything for anyone they cannot do for themselves. You're stealing from them when you do that. And it's a great rule of thumb for kids. Once they can dress themselves, they dress themselves. If they can set the table, even if it takes twenty minutes, it's like, they're setting the table. You're not doing a favor by helping them do anything they can do themselves. It's kind of harsh, but it beats the hell out of the witch in Hansel and Gretel So anyways, one of the things we're going to look at as well, is the dark side of positive motivations. Now how are we gonna do this? One of the things you might ask yourself is how in the world do you know if something is true? Now, the first thing I would suggest is that the attitude you guys should bring to this class is that nothing that I tell you is true. Okay, now I don't mean you should be arrogantly skeptical because that's not appropriate. But, you should bring every critical faculty you have to bear on what I tell you to see if you can chip away at it because what you want to do is you want to build yourself a body of knowledge that you cannot undermine. And the way you do that is by trying to undermine it, by hacking away at the foundation with everything you've got, and if the ideas can withstand a total onslaught, then you've got something. You've got a foundation. You've got something you can stand on that's gonna be there when things get rough. So I'm gonna tell you what I found that's been useful to me when things got rough, but I don't expect you to assume that that's gonna work for you, and I don't want you to - like I want you to listen and to think, but I want you to keep your wits about you. Now, I'm gonna tell you how I go about to determine whether something is true. Now first of all, there's different definitions of truth. So we're gonna flip back and forth between two. One definition of truth is an objective definition, but we don't have to talk much about that cause you guys already know what that is; but there's another definition of truth that I think the best way of defining it is as pragmatically true. Pragmatism is a branch of American philosophy, and it's a very sophisticated branch of philosophy. In fact, I actually think it's the most sophisticated brand of philosophy. Probably because it makes the least claims. What the pragmatists state, basically, is well you really don't know anything. You don't have ultimate knowledge about anything, so your knowledge always bottoms out in ignorance. So then the question is well, how do you know then, if anything is true? And the pragmatists would say, in a sense you don't. What you know always is if something is true enough for a particular function. So for example, your theory about getting to the door might be that you can stand up and walk there, and you might - well god only knows what might happen on the way there you know. Maybe there'll be an earthquake, or a ceiling tile might fall on you. Who knows? Maybe you'll have a heart attack. So you don't know whether you can get there; you can infer from past experience, but if you get there then what you can say is my statement about truth was sufficient so that the outcome was what the theory predicted. So in some sense, what the pragmatists are saying is that every time you make a statement, especially if it's related to action, that you offer a theory of truth along with that statement, implicitly which is that this is true enough if what I predict happens happens. And so, it's a very nice theory eh? It doesn't require you to be omniscient about anything for things to be true enough, and you are ignorant - you don't know everything about anything, and so obviously you're working in the world with partial knowledge, and it works - not all the time. You get old, you get sick, you die. You're not gonna work it out thoroughly. So we're gonna use the pragmatic truth framework and we're gonna use the objective truth framework. And one of the propositions that I'm going to make to you is that the stories that are associated with our deepest moral intuitions are pragmatic truths, and that you need pragmatic truths and you need objective truths, and you need pragmatic truths because you don't just need to know what the world's made of. You need to know what to do about the fact that the world's made out of things. And because human beings are motoric creatures, we act in the world. We act on the world, so what we need to know is how is it that you should act on the world. That is not a question that could be addressed by objective methods. Technically right? Because it's actually a value question. What should you do? Science, by its very methodologies, refuses to answer such questions. People confuse the fact that science is value free, sort of, with the idea that existence is value free. Like that's philosophically primitive, I would say, because science was actually set up to get rid of the value of this objective value in its technique. So you can't say we set this thing up to get the values and all the values fall. It's like there's no value. No, no, you put that domain out of the range of consideration. That doesn't mean it doesn't exist. It's just a different - it requires a different philosophy, a different outlook, different techniques, different tools, different methods of proof. All of these things. So part of what we're gonna do - I'm gonna use objective truth as much as I possibly can because I think that a lot of what psychology, as a science, has been able to offer in the last hundred years has been extraordinarily useful for elucidating some of the issues that we're going to discuss. Because we really have made some progress in understanding the psyche, especially at a biological/behavioral level. We got some pretty solid information, it's not perfect but it's helpful. So we're gonna draw on a bunch of sources. We're gonna draw on stories. We're gonna draw on literature. We're gonna draw on philosophy. We're gonna draw on religion. We're gonna draw on mythology. We're gonna draw on biology and psychology. There's this idea which you should've learned about - which you should've learned about if you're a psychologist - called multi method multi trait matrix. This was invented back in the 1950's. I think it was Meehl and Cronbach. It was a famous paper that was published in the 50's. Everyone's supposed to know it. No one ever pays attention to it. But, what they were interested in is how do you know if when you say that something exists, like let's say anger, does anger exist? Well, the answer seems self evident. It's tricky because generally no one comes up to you and says anger. They tell you a little story where they use words related to anger in the story and you sort of derive what they mean by angry from the context. The context is important in defining the reality, so you don't know if the central idea, anger, can be pulled out of the context and you can say that's a thing like iron is a thing, or like mercury is a thing. Maybe it's not. Maybe it's a pattern or maybe it's something that is a convention or you know, maybe there's all sorts of things that are associated with it. So, one of Cronbach and Meehl's fundamental claims was that in order to determine whether or not something existed, you had to be able to detect it using different methods. Now, it's tricky because it's not obvious what constitutes a different method. So you kind of have to make a judgment but I would say you use a multi method, multi trait means of determining what's true with your senses. How many do you have? Six, because you have proprioception. Why? Well let's say five, for the sake of simplicity. Why? Why not one? Student answers: To increase the likelihood of it being true. You could see something but not touch it. That might be a mirage maybe. So there's multiple reasons for it to be pointing to the probability of it being true. Yes, well that's exactly it. And you want it to be - so the sense idea is a really good one because you can see sense uses different modalities. It's like obviously the eyes rely on electromagnetic radiation and the ears rely on vibrations in the ear, and touch is really an atomic phenomena in some sense because you're feeling the outer surfaces of electrons with your electron surfaces. There's taste, which is again a molecular level phenomena. And smell. So our idea kind of is, is if all five of those things detect it, it's sufficiently real so we can use it to guide our actions and we won't be wrong. So it's five dimensions - you need a five-dimensional analysis, and that's evolved. You might say, well let's call that a good estimate. You need five ways of detecting something before you can be sure it's true. Now you know, when you're learning about experimental psychology, p is less than 0.05 and you use a measurement, and then you determine whether the probability that that has manifested itself exceeds a certain level of chance. If it does, then the thing exists. But that's actually not right. It's not right for experimental psychology, and experimental psychologists have known it since the late fifties. You have to demonstrate the damn thing exists multiple different ways. Now, what constitutes a different way can be subject to debate. It's a complicated thing to sort out, but you can kinda figure it out right? Maybe use a physiological measurement and self report or something like that, or you self report another report. Maybe you don't need five, but you probably need three, or something like that depending on the - so what I'm going to do is tell you a story, roughly speaking, and I wanna make the story evident at five or six different levels of analysis. And I want to show you how the story is the same at all these levels of analysis. Now, the one - one of the potential flaws of that method is this. Joseph Campbell, for example, wrote about hero mythology. Some of you have probably read The Hero of a Thousand Faces. One of the criticisms about Joseph Campbell and people like him, is that they read the stories of multiple cultures, but they have an a priori framework. Because of the a priori framework, they only see what their theory tells them that they're going to see. They don't look for the exceptions, so it's a problem with pattern recognition. You may be able to recognize patterns where they don't exist. Now, my method could be criticized on that grounds. But, the way I've tried to protect myself against that was to make sure I drew from enough sources so that the probability I would be able to tell a coherent story across all those different types of methods is vanishingly small. Now you're going to have to decide if that's true. I'll tell you roughly, the dimensions of analysis. The ideas that I'm going to talk to you about, I've put into practice personally. They work for me. They work for the people that I've taught them to, so those are family members often, but not only family members, lots of other people because I'm also a clinician right? So it seems to work quite nicely. I have a lot of people write to to me and tell me the ideas have worked. So, I've got multi rater reliability. And then, I think it's manifest biologically, and I think it's manifest culturally, and I think it's manifested in these very, very old stories and anthropologically and so forth. You know, make up your own mind, you can see. The other thing - I don't really know what to do, what to make of this. You know sometimes you have an intuition of truth. It's like maybe you're describing a problem to someone and they say this seems to be at the heart of it. They give you a formulation, and it kind of goes click. Yeah, that's how all those things hang together. It's a pattern recognition mechanism. People generally have the feeling that when something like that happens, something of truth has been revealed. Now, a very common response from the students I had in these courses is that I never tell anyone anything they don't already know. And the reason for that, what I'm hoping is the reason, is that what I'm outlining is archetypal structures and you know, I've drawn a lot of my work from Jung and was very interested in archetypal structures. So, what will happen - and I think it will happen - is I'll tell you a story, you'll think oh yeah right, that's what that means, and I see in here all the things that it explains. So you'll have this sense, and that's the - we talked about your friend with the spiritual awakening. Often, one of the cognitive phenomena that accompanies a spiritual awakening is the connections of many, many diverse phenomena into an overarching unity. And you feel that, like as a radical simplification. It's something like that, a decrease in entropy, or something like that. It's a very, very powerful sensation. I mean, there's other sources of what you might call spiritual experiences as well, but that's certainly one of them. And so you can see you know, I'll tell you these stories; you can think oh well - how does that story manifest itself in your experience? That's a phenomenological level of truth. So the phenomenologists - branch of philosophy - started by Heidegger, not exactly but let's say extended as well as anyone extended it, by Heidegger. Heidegger thought that Western philosophy had gone wrong basically since the time of Socrates which is quite a long time. And he said that we became interested in what the world was made of, and how we knew things, and what we should've been interested instead was the nature and quality of being. What he meant by being isn't the objective world. What he meant by being was the manner in which you have experience. So there are elements of being that aren't objective elements. So I would say pain is a phenomenological reality. It's not something you can - you can index it objectively, but the index is not the phenomena. And you know, is your pain real? This is a question for people who think there's no such thing as meaning. Like you try to argue yourself out of pain and see how far you get. You might think, well that's not the sort of meaning I meant. Well you know, a negative meaning is a place to start right? Because if something's negative and it's real, it does imply that there's something positive that's real. It might be harder to get a hold of it, but at least it's not pain. But, pain - Descartes, and I'll close with this. You guys can have a break. Descartes implemented a method called radical doubt when he went on his philosophical journey. What Descartes looked for was one thing he couldn't doubt. Cause he was probably clinically depressed and he was doubting everything, like how do I know the world isn't just a mirage made by an evil demon to obfuscate reality from me. Well his conclusion was that the one thing that he could not dispute was that he was and could think. Now I don't think Descartes really meant what we meant by think. I think he meant more by what we would mean by experience because thought has become a much more narrowly defined term since the time of Descartes. So I don't think he meant I think therefore I am, I think he meant something like I experience. I have experience, therefore I am. Regardless of that, modern people think about it as thought. Heidegger was different. Heidegger basically said, the one thing you can't dispute is that experience is your experience. It exists. It's almost by definition, it's like the definition of exist. And then he was interested in what the fundamental elements of existence were. And they're not atoms, like the fundamental elements of the objective world. They're more things like pain, and for me that was the thing that stopped me from doubting. It's like, I cannot doubt the existence of pain. It seems real. I might say it seems more real than anything else. Now, you might say you don't believe that, but I would say I don't care what you think you believe. I'll watch you when you're in pain, and every single one of your actions will indicate that you believe in it. And not only that, but that you can't not believe in it. It's there, and it's there so much that that's a meaning. And so it's in that way that Heidegger thought out existence, or as experience as composed of meaning. So part of the reason this course is called Maps of Meaning is that because one of the things we're going to look at is the structure of meaning, and we're going to start with negative meaning because from my perspective - look you can doubt whether or not good exists. But once I'm done telling you the things that I know about human history, there won't be a single person in this room who thinks that evil doesn't exist. And you might think that's a bloody horrible thing to learn, but it's not. It's unbelievably useful because once you can establish something that you cannot deny, you can move from that. I think you can hypothesize that if you're capable of detecting radical evil, I'll tell you about Unit 731, or you can look it up yourself - I wouldn't recommend it by the way. Once you can identify radical evil and you think, well that's just - beyond a doubt that's reprehensible. There's no justification for that whatsoever, no matter what, whenever. Well then you've got something to stand on, and you can start thinking, well what's the absolute opposite of that thing? It might be, how is it that you can conduct yourself so that in your sphere of influence, the probability that anything like that is reduced to the absolute maximum? Well, that's a reasonably moral question. And I don't think it's something you can dispense with with a casual nihilism. I don't think a nihilist can dispense with it, because even nihilists suffer. Thank god for that. It's their only source of potential salvation. Sometimes they notice it - oh I'm suffering from all this nihilism, maybe that indicates there's something flawed in it. It's always possible. Okay, so let's take a break. We will come back at, what time is it? 2:58 2:58? Okay. Come back at 3:15. We will see you then. And then I will talk to you more about the technical elements of the class.
We're gonna review a proposition. Now, if I ever tell you something in enough detail that you've already heard that you've heard it enough, please tell me because I can't precisely remember what I told you. I know the line of the narrative throughout the entire course, and we will return to some things fairly frequently, but I don't want to tell you the same story three times, unless you're particularly compelled by that story. So let me know. We're going to start with a proposition, and the proposition is that in order to orient yourself properly in life, there's two classes of information you have to have access to. One class of information is information about the nature of the objective world, and the objective world is described in a manner - or the world when it is treated objectively - is described in a manner that strips all the subjectivity from it. That's the technology. The philosophical technology that's behind the Scientific Revolution - involves stripping the subjectivity from the sense mediated consequences of certain kinds of actions because when you lay out an experiment, you're not just talking about what happened, you're talking about what you did and then what happened. And you're supposed to be able to do it in a way that ensures that if someone else followed the exact same procedure, they would obviously observe the same consequences. And, in some sense, we're trying to establish a realm of knowledge that is universally applicable to people despite their individual differences. That's one way of thinking about it, and obviously that works. Whether or not it works in a Darwinian sense, we still have to determine because it could easily be that our development of the scientific method is what will make us go extinct, under which circumstances you might consider it to have been an error. But it doesn't really matter at the moment because so far so good, roughly speaking. Now, people think the world is an objective place because we can describe it objectively, and that's a much more debatable presupposition. It's partly debatable because it's actually based on a decision in some sense, rather than evidence, partly because your knowledge is finite in every direction in some sense. So what that means in a way is no matter what you know about anything, you don't know everything about that thing. And so, you kind of ground out in ignorance at some point. So what means is you that you have to buttress your thinking with a set of assumptions that you don't question or you just end up in an infinite regress. One of those sets of assumptions is usually reality definition sets of assumptions, or truth definition sets of assumptions, but the thing is generally no matter what your theory of reality is, or what your theory of truth is, there are alternative theories of reality and alternative theories of truth that are equally rigorous and that have different domains of application. And it's a very tricky business, so for example, if you're a reductionist materialist, you're going to make the presupposition that brain physiology is more real than emotional experience. I suppose that's in some sense because you can't get access to someone else's emotional experiences, at least not directly whereas you can get universal access to the fundamental details of someone's brain physiology. It's something like that. Anyways now, that's still an arbitrary assumption because the person and you as well are going to be acting all the time as if your emotions and motivational states are real and so then you run into a problem and the problem is well, how do you know what someone actually believes? You listen to what they say or do you listen to their explicit and well articulated theories, or do you watch how they act? And the answer to that is, you make your choice and generally there are reasons for that. Now, one of the conceptual tools that I have found helpful in my attempts to avoid confusion when dealing with the fact that there are very many ways of looking at the world is to start thinking about theories of reality as tools rather than descriptions and I find that extraordinarily useful as a metaphor. If you have a toolbox full of tools, you don't necessarily try to reduce the utility of one tool to another and you don't actually complain that all tools aren't the same. A wrench isn't a very good hammer, but that doesn't mean you can criticize it on that grounds. You might not want to use it as a hammer, although you could I suppose, but it's not a justifiable criticism, and it looks to me - and this is something that a psychologist named George Kelly pointed out as well, although I think it's also an element of pragmatic philosophy is that one set of tools for one thing, and another set of tools for another thing. That's helpful, that's helpful. And then you are also thinking about the sorts of problems that you might solve with different forms of tools, and one problem is what are things made of - in an objective sense let's say. And another problem might be what is the landscape of experience, and that's more of a phenomenological problem. That's the problem the phenomenologists set out, and then the other problem might be how do you, and should you conduct yourself. And it could easily be that you can't use the same tool to solve all of those problems, and I would say particularly true, technically, when you're dealing with science because science in its very nature refuses to answer questions about what it is that you should do, apart from some implicit assumption that you should do science which is actually not - Well that's actually not a scientific assumption, by the way, because it's a moral assumption, and the moral assumption is that if you conduct yourself in a scientific manner, things will be better because why would you run around doing science to make things worse, although you absolutely can. And, we perhaps are, and even if we aren't, we still might. So that's one of the things I find quite interesting about the scientific endeavor, and this is something Jung observed was that it had to be nested in something outside of itself to be given its motive force. It had to be nested in a system of moral assumptions, and the fundamental moral assumption is the world will be a better place if we conduct ourselves along scientific lines, because why do it? And that's a statement that cannot be analyzed from within the confines of the scientific worldview because it doesn't analyze those sorts of questions. Now, you can say they're not real, but that's a stupid answer because - I think it's a cop out, maybe it's not a stupid answers, but it probably is. At least it's a cop out because if you don't take that question seriously, you can't really justify engaging in the activity. So you could refuse to answer it but you're basically answering it by engaging in the activity anyways so even if you're not saying it, you're still justifying it. Assuming you can draw conclusions from people's actions like you can from their statements - and it's hard to really dispute that I would say. If you're wise, in fact, I think you derive more conclusions from their actions than their statements. So that's the underbelly of the first proposition, and the development of that is something like the means by which information is transmitted that is relevant to the domain of behavior is not the same means by which it's transmitted - by which scientific information is transmitted. And we kinda know that too, without any real debate, I believe, because how old do you think science is as a technical endeavor? What would you estimate? Hundreds of years. Maybe thousands of years if you're willing to give the Greeks some credit, but really probably not. Probably hundreds because Aristotle wasn't a scientist - like he wasn't a bad observer, but he certainly wasn't an empirical observer, and no one got science straightened out till what - Newton, Descartes, Bacon, and you know there's a handful of other characters who were thinking around that period of time. They sort of established the proper methods, really, and also the philosophy that underlies it. It's not very old. Six hundred years, you know, five hundred years. That's really nothing. It's the blink of an eye. It's yesterday, if that. It might even be an hour ago. It's nothing, but obviously people were transmitting information about how to act to each other for untold millennia before that, and it's probably more like - it depends on what you're willing to consider transmission of information, but even octopi couldn't imitate, and they're the smartest invertebrate. They're quite bright, those things. They only live a couple of years so they can't really get things going. They can problem solve. They can pull corks out of bottles to get like a crab in a bottle, and if they watch an octopus - if an octopus watches another octopus pull a cork out of a bottle to get a tasty crab, then that octopus knows how to do it, which is pretty impressive. And you could kind of see why octopi can kind of do that because not only do they have a brain, but they also have little tentacle-y appendages which allow them to manipulate things. So, one of the precursors to being able to be intelligent in any act of way is that you have to have tentacle-y appendages so you can manipulate the world. At least for it to be anything resembling what we would consider to be intelligence, and that's part of the reason dolphins aren't really as intelligent as people like to think because what are they gonna do? They can't build cities with their flippers. They're kinda trapped in their test tube bodies, and the same thing applies to whales. Obviously they have very large brains, and they're very social, and they can learn, but whatever their intelligence is, it's not like our intelligence because we run around tearing things apart and putting them back together and we've got the body for that. So anyways, long before we were practicing science, we were doing perfectly well, in a sense, without any real knowledge of the objective world at all - at least not any scientific knowledge about the objective world. So another thing you might observe about that is that you can survive perfectly well without knowing any science at all, in an articulated and developed manner. Of course animals are in that category. So, that also, I think in some sense, undermines the claim of science to anything approaching a universal truth because obviously life can get along perfectly well without it. Now it depends on some degree whether you're a Darwinian or a Newtonian. Perhaps the unwillingness to commence on what people should do is one feature of modern science than it is of science in general because I'm thinking someone like Clifford. I don't know if you know his essay on belief. I don't, no. Oh okay, well his maxim is that basically it's wrong always for anyone everywhere to believe anything on his push to evidence. And he sort of tries to prove it - he's a mathematician. He tries to prove it on a moral basis. Of course, it's not scientific. That kind of claim can't be scientific but Yeah, well I mean obviously the people who began the Scientific Revolution thought of it as part of a moral movement. I mean it was part of the enlightenment. It was part of bringing clarity to our conceptualizations of the world and that was supposed to be a positive thing, but the only issue is that claim seems to be outside of the claim on science, in some sense. Anyways, you get the picture with regard to the argument. Okay, now the next step might be if you need or can utilize or there exists information that is not strictly scientific, one might be, well, where did that information come from? That's a good one. How is it transmitted? That's another one. And the worst of it is, of course, how might it be verified? Because one of the issues - one of the things that scientists have really got down, and it's a major deal, is that they can lay forth a theory of truth and they they can operate within that theory of truth and pretty much everyone can agree on what it is. The more well established the science, the more that's the case. Like people don't really doubt Einstein's - people really don't doubt quantum theory anymore, and you guys don't doubt it because there you are using your computers and you wouldn't be able to use your computers if quantum theory wasn't right, so it's certainly right enough. But enough more impressively than that, whenever someone's tried to prove it wrong, in any possible way, even in its most bizarre predictions over the last hundred and some years, it's passed every test with flying colors. So you know, you can make pretty damn solid truth claims from within the scientific perspective, but the problem is that it's a lot harder to do that from within a moral perspective and there's all sorts of reasons for that. One reason might be that there's a certain amount of situational complexity related to every moral question that you can't reduce. For example, imagine if you're a clinical psychologist and you're listening to two people who know each other very well, maybe husband and wife, discuss their last argument. And you might say - well you might think - well let's get to the bottom of this. Let's find out what this argument is about. You might think, if you were scientifically inclined, that it is in fact about something which means that if you investigated long enough, you can actually figure out what the facts are, but I actually don't believe that's true. And the reason I don't think it's true is this. Imagine you have a - there's this old joke about these two friends. They're like 85 years old and they're sitting on the park bench feeding the pigeons, and one friend says to the other "64," and the other guy cracks up and laughs like mad about that. Then the other guy says "83," then the other guy cracks up and laughs about that, and some guy's watching them and wondering what in the world is going on. So the person comes over to these old guys and says what's the scoop here? All you're doing is sitting there saying numbers to each other and then you're laughing uproariously and I just don't get it. And they said, well we've known each other so long that we've heard each other's jokes at least a hundred times and so we have them completely memorized, and so a couple of years ago we decided we'd just number the damn things and it would take a lot less time to tell then and we could laugh more that way. So, it's an interesting little joke because it sheds some light on the nature of deep relationships, and if you have a deep relationship with someone, here's how you can think about it. Imagine you're trying to analyze an essay, and I've actually built an essay writing module which is on my site - 230 website. I don't remember which template it is but I'll tell you in a while. It's based on this theory of meaning, roughly speaking, and you should use it to write your essay because if you do, it'll be a way better essay. Here's the issue. If you're reading an essay, where is the meaning? Well, that's a hard one because it might be a hard one. So, the question might be badly formulated in some sense because it might be many places. But, let's think it through logically. Well you need the letters if it's written in alphabetic script. So obviously some of the meaning is in the letters, and then the letters are combined in certain particular ways and that gives you some words, and the words are combined in some particular ways and that gives you phrases, and the phrases are joined together in sentences, and the sentences are strung together in some reasonably coherent manner. So they kind of go from start to end in a paragraph, and then the paragraphs are strung together in a coherent manner to make up the totality of the essay. One of the things I noticed when I tried to figure out how to grade essays and how to assess them is that you could do a good or a bad job at any one of those levels. Like a really bad essay is full of spelling mistakes, the words are inappropriate because the person doesn't actually understand them so they're awkwardly used, the phrases are put together in a cliched manner, the sentence structure isn't good. The sentences aren't even in the right paragraphs, much less organized properly. The paragraphs don't flow from one to another in what might be called - that's kind of where the skeleton of the story is. It's sort of the most important level in some sense, and even if that wasn't all wrong there's actually no idea there anyways. And then you can also read essays that have one or more of those flaws or some combination of all of them. So very frequently, I'd read a student's essays and this often happens with smart, creative students who are very badly educated, and that would be probably fifty percent of the people in this class, I would bet. I say that for genuine reasons because I run a fourth year seminar where I have people write extensively, so what they do is they write a four page essay, and then I complain about it at all those levels of analysis, and then they write the same essay again in six pages, and then I do the same thing, and then I do the same thing and then they do the same thing in eight pages, and half of the first essays are terrible. That's partly because students do triage. They think, well do I really have to work in this course? I'll try a bit and if I get slapped, I'll work a little harder, and if I don't, I'll devote my time to other courses which is a perfectly reasonable thing to do, but some of it is just pure inability. But what is really fascinating is by the end of the course is that all of the students are writing well, and it's pathetic as far as I'm concerned because it meant that everybody could have been taught to write ten years ago but they weren't. Anyways if you look at this template that I laid out, then it will help you in this because it walks you through the process of writing properly. So now and then I would read an essay and everything is wrong about it, but there's a really smart about it, and knowing this multilevel idea with regards to meaning, I can say, look you're smarter than you can write. There's really something here, but here's all the things that are wrong with it. Then you get a worse situation in some sense where everything about the essay is good but the idea isn't, and so the words are good, the phrases. The sentences are right, and it goes together but it adds up to nothing. And those are hard to grade because you give them a C maybe or a B, cause I'd probably give them a B, and the person comes up and says, where did I make a mistake? It's like, well you didn't really make a mistake, you just didn't do anything right, and that's a whole different problem. So you think, that's pretty complex with regards to an essay. Where's the meaning? But that isn't where the meaning is. Here, let me give you an example. I was thinking of this the other day. So, the ethnicity and the cultural backgrounds of my students have changed quite radically over the years. When I started teaching this course for example - and my personality course as well which would have been thirty years ago - I can take it for granted that everyone in the room would know the basic biblical stories, and they would know the Judeo-Christian version of them and not, say the Islamic version of them. Well that's gone, and that's really made it difficult for me in some ways because there's a bunch of things. There's a bunch of collective knowledge that might constitute a shared set of cultural assumptions that I can no longer presume and it means there's all sorts of things that I can't talk about or if I'm going to talk about, I have to step way back and start from first principles let's say. So that's also made me think because if I - let's say you write me an essay and let's say it's a Psychology essay. Now you're gonna presume that there's a whole bunch of things I know about Psychology that you also know. And the reason you're going to presume that is because, well we come - for the purpose of this conversation - we come from the same cultural background and what that means is we share a set of assumptions, and we don't have to say what those assumptions are. We can assume them and then we can talk about the things that we disagree about, and of course that's what you're doing when you're writing an essay or having a conversation right? You're saying well obviously we don't have to talk about what we know because we already know it. We want to push that a little bit so we start to talk a little bit about the things we don't know, but no more so than we both understand. So then you think damn it, the meaning of the essay isn't in the essay at all. It's in the interaction between the shared cultural assumptions between the writer and the reader and the essay. Well and then you think, it's worse than that even because the shared cultural assumptions are in their own sort of network, and then that's nested inside a very an extraordinarily broad biological network and it's like actually, you can continue expanding the outer reaches of the essay without limit. So part of that means it's actually impossible to specify the meaning of the essay. It's something you both work at in combination, as writer and as reader, but it's very fluid and flexible. That problem is partly why the post modernists got going because they sort of noticed this. Corrupt as they are, they did notice at one point that it was very very difficult to say what any given phrase, paragraph, or essay mean because it wasn't there - like it's not in the book. It's sort of in the book, but - you know this too if you listen to a piece of music. So let's say you had a favorite song when you were fourteen, and when you first heard that song, maybe you didn't like it that much, but you maybe heard it four times and thought man that's one excellent song. Then at some point, you've heard it so many times that you never want to hear it again. That's interesting too because it means the song has transformed in relationship to your historical interactions with it and you might say, no this song is the same. Well, it depends on what you mean by the song. The notes are the same. The experience has certainly transformed. So anyways, back to the couple that are sitting there talking. They're having this argument and they're trying to sort out what this is about. Well the problem is it's about everything the argument is about plus everything that's ever happened to them in their relationship. If someone has told you the same thing fifty times, it is not the same thing as the thing they told you the first time. God only knows how many transformations it's gone through as it's been continually repeated, and how many different arguments it's been embedded in, and how many things you'd have to know to understand the shades of intonation in all of that. But basically each utterance a couple produces is - it's meaning is determined by the entire history of interactions that those two people have had. So, how are you going to specify that? It's very very difficult to specify it. Now, you really can't, and it's also difficult to know when you've specified it enough. You know, one of the things that is interesting training as a psychoanalyst is that it started to become absolutely mind boggling how much archaeology you can undertake underneath a single statement, especially if it's delivered with a bit of edge and some contempt. It's like there's just levels and levels and levels and levels of meaning underneath that, and you can tell that when you're engaged in an argument like that because someone will trigger you, let's say, for lack of a better word, and they'll have broken a rule that you have established with them and you're both in a pit. The fight is about that pit, even though maybe it's about some surface thing, and you're just running around there like rats that are lit on fire and there's nothing you can do about it. And it's a consequence of all the issues that are lurking beneath the surface of that speech act that seemed to be something - you could capture it on a video. You can say, well here's what you said. There's a video tape recording of it. It's like no, that's not what you said because the videotape cannot capture the context, and it can't. So you can't even get an objective record of the meaning of the conversation because the meaning isn't right in the conversation. Okay so that's one of the problems. One of the problems we're trying to validate moral claims is that you've got this insane contextual complexity that's almost impossible to dispose of, and so you can say - you can even say that if person A did action A in situation A, that'd be right and then person B did action A in situation A, that would be wrong. It would depend on the person, and so it's very easy to slip from that into a kind of moral relativism because how in the world do you deal with the complexity and how do you make a truth claim? So I would really say in some sense that's the intellectual situation in modern universities. Now, the other thing that's kind of interesting is that this was actually discovered in a number of modern fields simultaneously, so just as the literary theorists started to discover, say after World War II, that it wasn't enough to say that a book had meaning in it. Like there was something wrong with that, and there isn't even a single meaning, there's a multiplicity of meanings and it isn't even a stable multiplicity of meanings, people were finding that out in other domains as well. For example in artificial intelligence where it became very obvious, very rapidly that perceiving a simple object was not simple because objects aren't simple, and the border between one object and another is in some sense arbitrary. I mean, when I look at each of you, I sort of see you as entities, but that's because I see you at this level of resolution. You're cellular masses at a different level of resolution. You're molecular composites at a different level of resolution. You're made up of ten times as many bacteria as cells at another level of resolution, so really you're more like an ocean than you are like an entity. And then, well is it you or your family that's the real. Or is it you, your family, and your culture? What about your species, or are you a mammal. It's like all of those things and any of those things at the same time, so when I look at you, what am I supposed to see? Do I see individual with name or do I see ethnicity or do I see - well you get the picture. So object perception turns out to be extraordinarily difficult because things aren't just simple objects even if they're relatively simple. So, you throw your hands. You think how can there be any harmony. How can you draw some sort of sense from that? Okay, so that's the argument against drawing any sense out of it. But then, let's try the other attack. Let's see if we can make a case for there being some claims of - that moral claims can be validated. Okay, so here's a question for you. If you took a bunch of chimpanzees that didn't know each other and you threw them in this classroom, what you would have is a war. Right. Now, you're roughly in that situation, not exactly because A - you're not chimpanzees, but you know your genetic material is quite reasonably related. You only split off your common ancestors seven million years ago, and that seems like a long time and it is, but it's not three hundred million years ago. It's still relatively recently from the evolutionary perspective. Here you all are, you don't really know each other. You obviously share important elements of identity. So you're all students, and you can come in here and all of a sudden you all know what to do, and no one fights. Or if they do fight, it's - there are very constrained rules around the fighting and everyone accepts them, and it seems hard to say that's not better than the alternative. So unless you wanna come in here and have an absolute chaotic war. Somehow we've managed to figure out how we can figure out how to bring relative strangers together in a relatively high pressure situation because we're learning about complicated and challenging things, and everybody gets along. And everybody's kind of happy about that. So it looks like we can figure out patterns of behavior that, well, then the question is, are they correct? Are they morally correct? Are they right, or did they work? And you might also ask yourself what's the difference between all of those claims, is there similarity or difference between those claims. So, and then you might ask yourself - okay so here's something else you might think about. So, let's say you're playing Monopoly. How many of you have played Monopoly in your life? Okay, is there anyone here who hasn't played Monopoly? Excellent. A cultural universal. So, obviously in some ways it doesn't matter if you get all those little hotels right? But, on the other hand if you act like it doesn't matter while you're playing Monopoly, then people hit you with things and they should because part of the rule is that you're gonna act like this matters because if you don't, then it's not any fun. So you have to act like it matters and then it turns out when you start playing, it matters. People will actually - they'll get angry, especially if you cheat. But people will play Monopoly. They'll act as if the endpoint matters. You might say, well what is the endpoint? And one answer is to get all the hotels and all the money, so you enter the 1%, so you have all the wealth and no one has any, and so you win and you feel happy about that, even if you're a radical left winger. So that's kind of interesting. Then you say, well that's not really the point. The point is to enjoy the game, and you say yeah okay that's probably the point too. And you might say, well that's not really the point either. You want to hone your negotiating skills. You want to spend some time with your friends. There's lots of things going on at once, but it doesn't really matter because Monopoly is a game that you'll play. Now imagine instead that Monopoly - here's the new rule for Monopoly. All the people you're playing with can randomly steal your hotels and houses and your money whenever they want, and you can steal it back. So then you think, well no one's gonna play that game, and then you think well why not? Well, the first surface answer is that's a stupid game, and you know that somehow. You think that's a stupid game, but then you start to think about well why is that a stupid game? Or you might say it's an unplayable game which would be a little bit more sophisticated. Why would that not work? And you might say, well what's the point in getting all the hotels if someone could just take them? But you might say what's the point in getting the hotels anyway? Like who cares about the damn hotels. So it's a bit tricky. There's something about the randomness of what's now allowed and the unpredictability of it and the arbitrary nature of it and its lack of a relationship with your own actions that takes all the motivational impetus out of the game. So one thing we might think about to begin with, is there's a difference between a good game and a bad game, and there's also a difference between a game and no game. And we don't know what the difference is exactly, but there is a difference. We might even say not only are there good games and bad games, some good games are better than other games. How many of you have played Settlers of Catan? Okay, is that better than Monopoly or worse? Student says: It's better. better. Does anyone think it's not better? Okay, why is it better? What's better about it? It's more complex and the part where you said - I mean it's not necessarily stealing but there's a piece of the game in there, I think it's like the robber or something like that. Yeah, there's a robber. Student says: And you place him on one of the tiles. You can mess with people, so that's fun. It is fun. It's like I'm gonna get you with a robber. It's more akin to real like I think, like in Monopoly No, that's reasonable. It's also got a strategic element. How many of you play Risk? Okay, Settlers of Catan or Risk? Okay, two Risk diehards. What about the rest of you? How many are for Risk? Two. How many for Settlers of Catan. Okay, okay. Well, Settlers of Catan is a bit like Risk because it has a strategic element and there's a territorial expansion that goes along with it, and there's also trading which is one of the things that's nice about Monopoly and about Risk. Okay but well, you can see - you have intuitions about what constitutes a better game and part of the way you develop those intuitions is not exactly philosophical because I doubt if you really thought through why Settlers of Catan is a better game than, say, Risk or Monopoly for those of that think it does, but you watch your own reaction and your own reaction is okay well I'd rather play Settlers of Catan. You might ask yourself why, but you don't have to. You'd just rather play it. So then you think well what does it mean that you'd rather play it? Well it's more fun, it's more enjoyable. If asked voluntarily, that's the one I would pick, but you really don't know why, apart from those reasons but obviously those are complex - that's a complex social engagement, those games. They're complex. In fact they're so complex, you can have preferences and not even know why, and that's interesting. I think the idea that there are games, good games and bad games and games and non-games, is a nice way of starting to conceptualize what the difference might be between moral systems because a game is actually a moral system. It has a point. It has an end. You have to cooperate and compete to run through the game. So awhile back, a psychologist actually started this and it's reprehensible, but psychologists have done lots of reprehensible things and this is one of them. This psychologist, whose name I don't remember at the moment, was reviewing the literature on the difference in aggression between boys and girls and men and women. Boys and men are much more aggressive, depending on how you define as aggressive, than girls and women. Now that tends to be mostly true with physical aggression. So you might say kicking, hitting, biting, punching, stealing. Two year old boys for example - two year olds, the ones who do most of that are boys. Now, the two year old girls are cutting each other up behind their backs but no one measures that. So you find for example, with female aggression it tends to be relationship savaging, and you see that in the playground. You see it in junior high. You see it in high school, and you see it on the net. It's always the same thing. Whether men are more aggressive than women, it depends on how you define aggression, but men are more physically aggressive anyways. Awhile back, there was this idea that maybe we could dampen down the male aggression by socializing little boys more like little girls, and one of the offshoots of that was that we should only let children play cooperative games. Now, the first thing you might notice is that anything you might have done as a game was not cooperative. Right, like it's not a game if it's just cooperative, but then the other thing you might notice is that the distinction between a cooperative and a competitive game is far more sophisticated than people that come up with those dimwitted theories of how to improve the world would ever appreciate. So here's an example. Is hockey a game? Yes. Is it an aggressive game? Yes. Is it a competitive game? Yes. Is it a cooperative game? Yes. Aha. Why? Why is it a cooperative game? Because you have to work together. Right, so there's the team right. You're also obviously cooperating with your team members, but you're also maybe trying to be the best player, but you're also trying to be the best player in a way that doesn't irritate the hell out of your team players right, because there's something about that that's counter productive. Like, even if you're a good player and you're a prima donna and you hog the puck, say, and maybe you're not interested in the development of your other team members, like you're not a good player even if you are the most talented. So, there's obviously a cooperative element. Is there a cooperative element beyond that? Well yeah, you have to all agree to sort of cooperate in so much as agreeing to the rules of the game and playing it. Right. You don't bring a chessboard or a basketball. Right. No matter if you're on different teams because you're all there to play hockey. So just to play hockey is a cooperative endeavor because think of all the other things you could be doing instead of playing hockey at that time. You could be doing an infinite number of other things so really if you look at the relationship between cooperation and competition in any collaborative human affair, things are usually competitive at one level, cooperative at another, competitive at another, like there's this continual interplay between competition and cooperation and you can't disentangle them. Now one of the things that Piaget said - Piaget is a, for those of you who don't know and you probably all do know, is perhaps the foremost developmental psychologist of the 20th century even though he didn't think he was a psychologist. Piaget actually made the claim, the radical claim, that two year olds for example - this isn't Piaget's claim but it's associated. If you put people together, and their age matched. So you got a group of nine months olds, say, one year olds, two year olds, three year olds, all the way up to eighteen, and you just throw them in a room, maybe with some things of them to do and you count the number of violent acts, which is kicking, hitting, biting, or stealing. Okay, two year olds, they're the most violent human beings and most of them aren't actually violent. There's a subset of them that are violent. It's about five to ten percent of them, and almost all of them are boys, and then if you track those boys across time, over the next two years most of them become civilized and the ones that don't never become civilized. So they're kind of antisocial throughout their childhood, and then when testosterone kicks in at about fourteen and all the boys get antisocial again, they catch up to the always antisocial boys and the normal boys taper off quite dramatically at around nineteen and flatten right out at about twenty seven but the antisocial boys, they just keep being antisocial. So now, Piaget noted that there was a dramatic transformation in behavior - individual behavior - in relationship to the social world between the ages of two and four. And, if you watch two year olds play together, what they did fundamentally is like a parallel play. So maybe, there's one two year old there and another two year old there and that two year old is playing truck and this two year old is playing ambulance or something or maybe playing doll, and they're sitting with each other, and maybe they interact a little bit but they're not playing the same game. Okay so, what they're doing in some sense is they're engaged in a goal directed activity, and it has a point. They're sort of integrating all their interior sub personalities in a sense that allows them to play a single game with themselves. That's pretty complex from a cognitive perspective because they're not fractionated, and they're not being pulled out by hunger or anger or sadness or fear or any of those things, and they're doing something that's highly complex cognitively and they can organize themselves well enough to do it for a substantial period of time. So it's like it's a major developmental advance. But they can't do it with another person. Now one of Piaget's hypotheses was that they couldn't do it - they couldn't play the same game with another person without actually setting up a competitive structure so actually competition was a prerequisite to competition. The idea was okay so, if you watch how kids do this, you can get a sense of it. I mean, on the one hand they all get together and they decide how to play tag. Everyone knows the rules for tag, and you can win at tag, but without the point - the point in some sense is the construction of a dominance hierarchy of competence. Someone wins and then there are sort of the people who are second best and third best, and everybody's really into doing that. You all have to get together if you're kids and you say well what should we do. You decide, well, we're gonna play tag and then you set up the rules because there's infinite variations of tag, and everyone goes off and play. So it's a competitive game because only one person can win, or maybe one at a time can win. But once you've all agreed on that, then you're cooperating. So that's quite interesting, and Piaget regarded that as a necessary stage of the ability to act like a social creature. Here's something that happens if you're not a very popular kid. Let's say four kids are playing Jacks. Good enough. I don't think kids play Jacks anymore but whatever. If they were playing Jacks, they're sittings there playing Jacks, and when you play Jacks, you bounce a ball and you pick up a jack, and if you manage that and a ball - if you manage that, you drop the ball and pick up two jacks and drop the ball, and you keep going up till like eight jacks or whatever. So now another kid wants to play Jacks, and we'll say this is a relatively popular kid and so the kid sidles up to the group that's playing and sits down because they're all sitting down and then watches, and then maybe watches jack-playing motions or a couple of comments about how the Jacks game is going, and maybe the other kids don't have to disrupt what they're doing very much and they can kind of open the circle, and let that kid scoot in and he gets to, or she gets to play Jacks too. Whereas a kid that doesn't - and that often doesn't happen, even if it's a popular kid. Sometimes the little group that's already formed won't open and let them in. You've been to cocktail parties. It's exactly the same thing. It's exactly the same thing. So you're supposed to hang around the edge of the conversation and maybe if you've got something that isn't too stupid to say, you can offer it and maybe they'd let you in. Okay, now if you're maybe not very social, what you do is stand out there and you don't notice what the hell is going on and you don't start to match your body to what's happening, and maybe you say, I don't want to play Jacks, that's a stupid game. Let's go do something else, in which case the kids are not happy with you, and you're unpopular. And that's that. You're stuck with it because if you've got that by the time you're four, the other kids are gonna leave you so far in the dust you're never going to catch up. Okay, so what have we concluded from that? We might conclude that people play games. There's lots of different games. There's lots of different playable games. There might even be an infinite number of playable games. There's a lot of non playable games, those are the ones that aren't any fun, and there's a lot of interactions that aren't games. Okay so we can all accept that, and then we've added to that the observation, or the presupposition, the ability to play games is a prerequisite for being socialized, so being able to operate together with people and that that operation has elements of competition and elements of cooperation. Reasonable? And then you might say, well everything people do communally has a game like aspect, and you might say well that's actually why kids like to play games because kids play games because games are a simplified analog of life, and if you get good at playing games - well what happens is that the games you play are increasingly complex and more and more real world like until they're actually indistinguishable from acting in the world. But they're even then they're still games in a sense because they could - the rules could be different. But then, you might think well are there things that couldn't be different? Well, yeah there are some things. It's gonna be cooperative. It's gonna be competitive. There's gonna be rules. Everybody needs to agree on the rules. People have to want to play. This is something else Piaget observed. It's bloody brilliant. He thought well, how can you decide if one game is better than another. Let's say that's a moral claim in a sense, but he wanted to narrow it down so that it was possible it could be answered. What he said was imagine you have group A that was attempting to obtain a goal, and group B that are attempting to attain a goal. Both groups have agreed that attaining the goal is valuable. We don't have to argue about the value of the goal. We've settled that. Okay now, we're going to make a further assumption which is all things considered, getting towards the goal with less effort, more enjoyment, and less trouble would be better. Okay, you have to take that as a given because it might not be. Sometimes something difficult is better. Well then you might say okay, would people working voluntarily or involuntarily be more likely be able to reach that goal with less misery faster and more effectively. Piaget's answer was if you could get people to play the game voluntarily, you don't have to waste effort on enforcement, no one kicks back so the system is going to be more efficient across time. Now that's smart because he's got a way of conceptualizing what might constitute a better system. Now it's grounded in subjective experience in some degree. Less misery, more enjoyment, but there's also a way of measuring it. It's also more efficient, or it does what it's supposed to do with less noise and grief. Less cost, let's say. So that's pretty smart. Okay, so then let's make another - well how old do you think kids games are? And I don't know what's happened to kids in recent years because their culture has somewhat been seriously disrupted by television and computer, but you guys are a lot younger than me. Did you play hide and go seek? You know ring around the rosie? You know that. Do you know what that is? You don't know Ring Around the Rosie. How many people don't know that. Ring around the rosie, pockets full of posies, hush ah hush ah, we all fall down? Okay, how many know that. It's an English nursery rhyme. It's about the plague. It's about the black plague by the way. And so, that piece of doggerel, that piece of rhyme has been around, transmitted by the oral culture of children since the time of the black plague. And so a lot of children's tradition is in the oral tradition, and a lot of the games children play are passed along by children. Kids learn how to play hide and go seek. And how many of you played tag? Anyone never play tag? Right, so everyone plays tag. How would you conceptualize tag if you were a biologist? What do you think children are doing? They're hunting. They're chasing things down, obviously. They're chasing things down. Now hide and go seek, that's a tougher one, but it's certainly exploration. They're exploring the landscape, and they're matching wits with one another, but - and they're also trying to see if - you know, do people like you enough to actually find you, which is a helpful thing to know if you're four years old. So anyways, children pass these games down across the centuries. Maybe tag is one of those games you don't even have to pass down. Children might just invent it spontaneously with every generation because you can more or less play tag with a dog. I mean, the dog doesn't quite get it, but it's close. Okay, so there are some games that are enjoyable enough that they're either transmitted and everyone knows them very rapidly, or they're so close to our nature we can just reinvent them and I think tag is the classic example of that. So that's interesting too because what it means is that there's certain types of competitive and cooperative behavior. Those are elementary moral systems that are - they look like they're integral to our nature. You can even say they're built right in, or you might say they're so close to built in that it doesn't take much of an introduction for the roles of the game before everybody's pretty happy with it. You see this with a lot of things. You play peek-a-boo with a baby. Okay so what are the rules? What are the rules of peek-a-boo. You cover your eyes. You cover your eyes. Okay so that's right. You go like this. Okay then what's the next rule? That's right. You reveal your eyes. You don't just sit there like this. Now you can play a trick on a baby if you want, and babies will laugh about this sort of thing which is really, I think, quite amazing. A baby's laugh is something remarkable to me. So you can go like this, and then like this and then like this and then like this and then you can do this, and the baby will laugh because that's a little variation eh. Or you can go like this. Right. And then the baby - well that'll even make you guys laugh. That's good, you can see how deeply rooted this is. So you know but, eventually what'll the baby do? It'll grab your hands, pull them down because you're breaking the damn rules. And the baby knows the rules even though you've never established any rules, and you can get the rules going with about five reps. You say okay, this. Maybe no one's ever played peek-a-boo with a baby. The baby figures it out right away. This, this, and then you vary that. Maybe do that. That baby thinks that's a hell of a good joke, you know, cause you went up instead of down, and so it's variations within this rule bound theme. It's kind of musical in a sense, there's variations in the theme. Now what you don't do is go. Waahh! Cause that'll just short it right out. So you don't do that unless you're, you know, unless you have an evil streak in you. So there's certainly ways of violating the baby's expectations and what the baby will do if you do that is startle and they startle with their whole bodies, and then look at you and probably they'll burst into tears. But some babies will just laugh like mad if something like that happens, and you can find those babies all over YouTube, right, because you get the baby that the mother sneezes and the baby has a fit laughing for like ten minutes. But it's quite interesting. One of the things about babies that I've never been able to understand is the staggering sophistication of their senses of humor. Like it's deep eh? Cause even a nine month old baby can play tricks on you. So, you know they're baby tricks, but still, they're tricks and they laugh and they're quite comical and they like variation. Anyways, the point is - one of the points of all this is this understanding of game like structure is really really really really really really deep inside of us, and it's way before articulation. It's way before we can say the rules. Babies can pick up the damn rules right away and it's kind of a dance in some sense, and a dance is also a rule bound structure. If you're dancing with someone well, there's rules, but don't step on their feet but you also set up a set of expectations in the dance and you violate them in tandem. And if you can do it gracefully, it's fun. Maybe the person you're dancing with is an absolute klutz and so autistic you can't even get outside of yourself, and might make a half reasonable partner or if it's just hopeless. But the dance is the same thing. It's not negotiated verbally. It's negotiated bodily, and unless we're able to imitate, and imitate insanely well because human beings can imitate like mad, because we won't be able to do that. So babies are the same way. You basically start - you don't actually. Peek-a-boo doesn't have rules because a rule is a stated description of a set of expectations. What peek-a-boo has is expectations and repetition, and you can violate the expectation but that doesn't mean you're violating a rule because an expectation is not a rule until you observe the expectation, you describe what it is and maybe even write it down. You can play games long before you can follow rules, and one of the things Piaget observed is if you watched kids play a complicated game like marbles and they're like six, and you take them out of the game and ask them what the rules are, they can't tell you or they might get some of them right and a bunch of them wrong. Maybe if you interviewed every child that was playing, and you looked at the commonality of the descriptions, you could extract out the underlying rule structure of the game. But the kids don't know the rules. What they know is how to play with other kids when they're playing marbles, and a lot of that's nonverbal hints and eyebrow raises and no you can't do that and so forth. It isn't much later until they can tell you the rules, if ever. So like, you know, you guys can't tell me the rules for dancing successfully with someone. You can tell me some stupid things you shouldn't do, but imagine how complex it is. It's very difficult to articulate out the whole structure, but you can sure tell when it's happening, and you can sure tell when you're not doing it or when your partner isn't. So partly what that also means is you know how to do things you don't know how to do, and you know how to all sorts of things you don't know how you know how to do. In fact, most of what you know is like that. That also means we can be playing games that are extraordinarily sophisticated that we don't understand, but that doesn't mean - well we can't describe at least. We don't have an articulated knowledge of the structure, but we can still play them. Now, I don't know if you know this or not. You might know it. A while back, twenty years ago - about that. Those massive online multiplayer games started to become popular, and some of them - I think, although I don't know this for sure - some of them lasted a long time, and maybe some of them still being played, like the early ones. So they developed entire worlds in there and you know, there was an economist who became quite famous because of those games. Castronova, I think his name was. Edward Castronova. I think that's right, but it's close. Anyways, he thought hey look man those aren't games, those are countries. So one of the things he tried to do was calculate their gross national product, and you know, you can trade items in those little worlds and you could sell them on eBay. For awhile in this one game, and maybe this still happens, there were young people in the Philippines who were working inside these games making artifacts that they were selling on eBay to other game players because they could make more money doing that than actually working in the actual world. So Castronova - I think was his name - said well you don't get it. That is the real world. It's not a game, or if it's a game it's so much like the world that it's part of the world. So he calculated the gross national product of some of these massive games, and they were like the 30th richest country in the world. It was insane. So that's interesting because that also shows you that the line between a game and reality is not clear. Here's another example of that. Something worth thinking about. Some of you have no doubt played very complex multiplayer online games, and I suppose those are often adventure games or quest games and you have to communicate with other people and you have to solve problems and maybe you have to defend yourselves, like you're in an exploratory party in a new world. Something like that. So it's pretty sophisticated, and okay some of you have worked at McDonald's or another fast food restaurant. How many of you have worked at a restaurant. How many at a fast food restaurant. Would you say that an online game is more like the world, or less like the world than your job at a fast food restaurant. More. It's more. Anybody disagree? Okay, why is it more like the real world? Because you're doing more complex stuff. What are you doing? You're exploring. You're thinking. You're getting out of situations because new ones are always coming up and you're dealing with them and you're learning. Fast food is like you're doing - Right, you're a real cog in a fast food machine. Yeah, but it's in the real world. Is it a game? You're more like a machine in the fast food part. So does that mean McDonald's is less real than a multiplayer online game? Well it's a tough one, eh, because when you're trying to think about what real means, is you might think maybe I phrased that wrongly. Maybe I could say is McDonald's a worse model of the real world than a multiplayer online game? And it's hard because it's hard to say McDonald's isn't part of the real world so a priori, the claim is kind of absurd. It's like well, you're in a building. People actually come there. They give you money. It's real. But then, well you think about these complex games and you're practicing an extraordinarily sophisticated form of social and intellectual behavior and we actually don't know what that does to people. Maybe it makes them extraordinarily sophisticated and social. I do think it helps with introverts quite a lot because it's harder for introverts to become extremely socially fluid because people wear them out. A lot of introverts do a lot of heavy duty socializing on the net, and in my experience it's been, all things considered, probably a plus rather than a minus. With regards to your use of computational devices, one of the things I used to see my kids doing is they would sit together in a group. They were teenagers, and there'd be a bunch of friends that weren't there and while they were interacting with all their friends who were there, they were also interacting with all their friends who weren't there. Is that a common thing for teenagers to do? You're texting your friends and so forth. Is that reasonably standard behavior? How many of you have done that? Okay how many of you have done that regularly? Okay, how many of you haven't done that? Okay, so most people have done it but not everyone. For those of you have done it, is that more advanced or less advanced social behavior? More. Okay you think more. Why? Cause you're keeping your friends in the room while they're not there. So it's like they have a conceptual idea of what you're doing and it's like - they understand where the group dynamics are moving towards without them actually having be there. Okay, do you think that you paid a price for it in the decrease of the interactions you were having with the people that were actually there? Not really.Yes. You think so. Okay, how many people think they do pay a price for it? How many people think they didn't? Okay, so - well let's start with you guys then. Why did you think you didn't pay a price for it? Well because I feel like it really doesn't take that much time to just text and go back to talk to your friends. Okay. Well I think that you can pay a price, but if you're doing it correctly and you're monitoring the conversation you're taking a part of, you can see when it would be appropriate to text someone else which probably means you're paying more attention to the people you're talking with because you're also texting. Okay so you're kind of taking a multitasking rationale for it in some sense, although assuming you have to also heighten your attention to manage that. There's people who didn't think - that you did pay a price for it. Who thought that? Okay, what sort of price? I think that especially when you're texting people, there's so much complexity that gets lost in translation, like you don't really convey your feelings, like there's so much more to use than language. Okay then they certainly lose something. What about you, while you're interacting with your actual present friends? I would say you have to commit some certain amount of effort to writing a text, you ignore aspects of - for example, they're asking about something and then you go and text the person and you come back and miss some part of the conversation. Yeah, so it's like kind of - Yeah so it's kind of like start, stop, start, stop. I don't think you can one hundred percent commit yourself to - Well one of the things you suggested was that some of that can be mitigated by doing it properly, which implies there's an emergent norm for doing this sort of thing and that if you're good at complying with the norm, then you're not irritating people and maybe you can handle both things at once. Something like that. But if it's properly to the people who are there, is it proper for the friend who is waiting for you to answer? Well I guess one answer to that is that's up to them to determine, like if they don't want to be part of it, they can do something else. The reason I'm saying that specifically is that you can imagine that's how the norm develops. It's like obviously if a successful norm is going to develop that allows text conversation and real world conversation to occur at the same time, everybody has to want it to happen. That means if you can't do it in the manner that everyone wants, it's going to die out. Now see, that's another example of how you can see how moral structures - I think - might evolve, is the right way of thinking about it because I think moral structures evolve. And I think they're just as real as anything else that evolves. Now, evolved things can be staggeringly complex. Just think about how many lifeforms there are, and how many niches there are for their lifeforms and so you have in some sense an infinite variety, but it's not infinite, and it follows patterns. Not just any old thing can be alive, and not just any old thing can be social. Here's an example, and I found this out awhile back. I did a lot of neurobiological research. Some of it hands on, a lot of it conceptual especially in the early days of my graduate work. I got really interested in the function of serotonin. You all know, undoubtedly, that one of the things antidepressants do is decrease the rate at which serotonin is pulled back up into the neurons that deliver it and that seems to help stabilize people's negative emotions. Makes them less volatile, less anxious, less likely to withdraw, and so - or you could say it makes them more confident. Now we also know if you say we look at a chimp hierarchy, you take bottom chimp and you give him anti-depressants, he looks a lot more like top chimp. So, because the bottom chimp world is a very dangerous place. It's very uncertain. He doesn't have a place to sleep. He doesn't have high quality mates. He doesn't have good things to eat. He's stressed man, it's bad down there. So maybe that's part of the reason his nervous system is tuned so that he's more anxious and upset by everything because everything is more dangerous. Part of that's modulated by serotonin. Okay, so here's a rough rule. If there's a hierarchy in an animal kingdom, as you move up the hierarchy, your serotonin levels increase and as you move down the hierarchy, your serotonin levels decrease and that's somewhat independent of your absolute wealth. So here's a famous experiment. It's called the White Hall experiment and it was done on English bureaucrats, and the thing that's so cool about the White Hall experiments is they were done fifty years apart. So what they showed basically was - imagine you take an English bureaucracy and you stratify it by position. Englishmen are hierarchical, and so you stratify it by position. You have the top people and the bottom people and what you find is the bottom people die faster and more often. You might say if you're not that healthy, you end up at the bottom. Fair enough, but there seems to be an effect above the effect of just general health. It's worse to be at the bottom than at the top. Okay, that was true 70 years ago, and another study was done 50 years after that. Now the thing that's so cool is by that time, from a material perspective, the people at the bottom of the modern hierarchy were at least as wealthy as the people who were like two thirds of the way up 50 years before because everybody had running water, everyone had enough heat for the winter, you know. Everyone had shelter, and so on. So you figure, with regards to wealth, once you've got running water, reliable shelter, heat, and maybe air conditioning if you live in the desert, and you're not hungry, you've got ninety percent of what wealth can deliver. Really, all things considered. The rest of it is just status and luxury items, but the relationship between position of status and death rates remain constant. So that's very interesting, and we know that that's true from a lot of other studies as well. It's like control for absolute wealth, there's still problems with hierarchy, and that seems mediated at least in part by serotonin, and serotonin regulates negative emotion, and the more negative emotion that you experience, the more cortisol you produce, and cortisol in high levels is toxic and suppresses your immune system so your brain gets damaged, and you gain weight and you get diabetes, and maybe develop Alzheimer's disease and are maybe more prone to cancer and heart disease, and that's just not good. Now that serotonergic mechanism is really old, and so you can give serotonin injections to unhappy lobsters and it cheers them right up, at least behaviorally speaking. If they're defeated in a fight, and you give them a serotonin injection, they'll stand up tall, confident and they'll fight again. I'm telling you that for a very specific reason. One of the things we've been asking about is well how might you conceptualize moral systems and how might you conceptualize evolution? One of the propositions was there are playable games and non-playable games. Well here's a playable game. Dominance hierarchy. We've been playing it for four hundred million years. It's stable. Now, it's so stable that even lobsters have them, but even worse is that the biochemical systems the lobsters use act within the dominance hierarchy and react to, it's the same in us. And so, not only is that stable, it's well ridiculously stable. So one of the things we could say is that one of the games that seems emergent and real is a dominance hierarchy. And then we might ask what exactly constitutes a dominance hierarchy, and we might ask well what constitutes a highly functional hierarchy versus a dysfunctional hierarchy, and even what does highly functional and dysfunctional mean. Well we have to define all those terms. We will, as we move forward. But the point I'm making is - and this is a bit of a contradiction with the initial system I made with the tight distinction between the scientific world and the objective world because I'm also talking about the evolution of games, and you know, the study of evolution is a scientific study and the dominance hierarchy is a biological phenomena and so in some sense it's also a game, and it's also a moral structure and so there are levels of analysis where these things start to get tangled together, and that's partly what we'll try to sort out. So, we'll do that in the future because it's very very complicated. Alright now we're gonna step back a little bit.
So the last time we talked, I talked to you about how the knowledge structures that we inhabit might be built from the bottom up. So I'm showing you this diagram because it might clarify that a little bit. What you see at the top - this is a hierarchy, a partially built hierarchy and so one way of thinking of an attribute like good when you apply it to a person, or bad or evil or wonderful, one way to think about it is as a description of an object, but it's not really. It's shorthand for a set of - well I think of them as micro personalities, but you can also think about them as behavioral patterns. Now, one of the things I mentioned to you about - I talked to you a little bit about words at one point, and what words signify and this is a very complicated problem so most of you are probably Augustinians without even knowing it because St. Augustine originally proposed that a word was a label for a thing. Of course, that's how people naturally think. I'm sure most of you would regard that definition as perfectly suitable, but it's by no means the only definition and it's by no means necessarily the correct definition. There's a famous philosopher named Wittgenstein who proposed instead that a word was like a piece in a chess game which meant that it was something that you did something with, or you might think about it actually as a tool. And when you think about how you use words, you can see that you're using them often as tools to interact with other people for a purpose. What I like about the tool idea - the tool idea is a very evolutionary sophisticated concept, partly because we're tool using creatures probably beyond our other capacities except for possibly imitation and language which set us so far apart from other animals, but the thing about a tool is that the difference between a tool and an object doesn't have a user. The word object doesn't imply user, but the word tool implies user, and it's not obvious that we ever interact with anything in the world without interacting with it in some motivated way. And so, what we're doing is we're using words to get through the world. To interact properly within the world and to move where we want to go. So that's the second way of thinking about a word. Here's another way of thinking about a word. A word is like a box of things and so imagine that you cleaned out your basement and there's a bunch of boxes downstairs and one box is labeled books. Well inside that box, there could be any manner of books. Books is a very very diverse set of phenomena. If you're moving, books are kind of condensed into one thing which are kind of heavy objects made out of paper. You can also imagine another box that says things. And in the thing box, I'm sure you have a thing drawer at home where you put all the things you don't know what to do with so it's like the category of all things you don't know what to do with. Things. Okay so a word can also represent a relatively heterogenous set of tools or entities. That's very very very useful to know because one of the things that happens often when people are arguing is that they use the same word but each word contains a set of different objects. You might say for example, is fear real? Questions like that are very strange. They're not really answerable in some sense because it depends on exactly what you mean by fear because fear can contain a lot of heterogenous entities, roughly speaking, and it means - it also depends on what you mean by real. So you can define fear and you can define real and so that fear is a subcategory of real or you can define fear and you can define fear so that fear isn't a subset of real. So, the idea that fear is a box that only contains a certain set of entities or a certain set of tools and that reality is the same is wrong, and people argue about those sorts of things all the time, and they make these binary questions. Is X a Y? Well, X and Y are generally not well enough to find so that you can easily find an answer to a binary question like that. Okay so, words can also represent a relatively heterogenous set of attributes or objects or tools. When you say that someone's a good person for example, you don't mean they're a good person all the time or that everything they've ever done is good because they wouldn't be a good person then, they would be a saint or some other fictional character like that. So, when you're applying the label - we'll call it label for the purposes of this argument. It's a descriptive tool actually. When you're applying a term like that to someone, it's a shorthand for a variety of states that this person could exist in. The majority of which you regard as positive. You might say he's a better person than she is, and then you'd say well the proportion of attributes that she has - I think I said she, whatever - it exceeds the proportion of positives that this other person has. So the other way you can think about a word is - this is more complicated, it involves a little bit of visualization. So imagine you have a child's train on a track. It's going around and around the track. And it's got cars on it that you can put things in, and all the cars are full of things, and then on the track there's a box with cutouts in it so that the train can pass through, and on top of the box is a word. And the word is things, and the train is going through the box. In some sense, what that would mean - imagine the train is long enough - at any given second, the box of things would contain different things, but it would still be a box of things. And a lot of words we use are like that. Not only do they represent a heterogenous set of entities, but the set changes depending on the context that we use the word in. So the reason I'm telling you that is because a word, here's another way of thinking about a word. This will be good for you computer - well you're all computer people now of course. A word is a low resolution image. So you think about it. A word is a good enough approximation of the thing that it's representing. Sort of like a thumbnail. Now obviously one of the differences of a thumbnail and the real thing is that the real thing exists at a much more, much higher level of resolution. It exists at many, many more layers. You can use the thumbnail to represent it. The advantage to doing that is that it doesn't take up much processing time, and it doesn't take up much memory. So lots of time, you want to use the shorthand for the thing rather than the thing because it's just too complicated otherwise. And then you might say well how do you know your shorthand representation is a good representation of the thing you're trying to represent, and the pragmatists would say well it depends on what you want to do with it. That's the tool-like aspect. It's like if you're using word X to represent potentially heterogeneous class Y, and when you use it, you get to where you're want or you get close enough to where you want, then it's good enough. So it's like how you know a joke is good enough, well someone laughs. Okay, the joke is good enough, and so one of the things that's quite interesting about the way you interact with the world, and this is something the pragmatists really discovered in some sense, was that you're always aiming at some bounded set of events that's somewhat different than the current set of events because otherwise you could just sit there, and then you put your conceptions to work and your actions to work to manage the transformation, and if you manage the transformation, then it's good enough. You don't have to go any farther than that. So that explains partly how you can maneuver in the world with limited knowledge. You use low resolution representations to partially hit vague goals, and that generally gets you there. That process was called satisficing by - now what's his name, an extraordinarily famous economist and psychologist. Anyone remember who coined the word satisficing? Well, an economist psychologist would be Herb Simon. That's right, it's Simon. It was Herb Simon, and you know he said well, you're often not out to optimize. Let's say in a search for a partner, to optimize it you'd have to search through several billion people. Well you're not gonna do that because you don't have the time. So then you might say well, you don't know exactly how to do it but it's something this. You have five attributes that you're looking for and maybe two that you don't know you're looking for but you are looking for, and the first person that comes along that matches those well enough, you pick. So it's not an optimization issue, but given that you have a limited amount of time, you can't wait around for optimized solutions. You have to go ahead with sufficient, and then move to the next issue. Okay, so all that's a conceptual precursor for taking a look at this diagram. So we're calling someone a good person. So what does it mean? Well we're going to do a bit of a microanalysis. We're going to assume it's a bit of a shorthand, low resolution representation of the person and that you can decompose it. If someone says X is a - Henry is a good person, and maybe he's 45. You might say does he have children? Then you might say yes. Then you might say well is he a good parent because you might assume that if he's a good person, he might be a good parent. Now it's conceivable that he can be a good parent without being a good parent if he was good at five other important things. But let's assume as a good person he's also a good parent. I think it's reasonable to assume that good parent would be a subset of good person, right, because it's more specific. More specific means it covers less time and space in some sense because good person is a description of a person that covers how the person interacts with the world across the broadest possible amount of time and location. And then good parent, well you can find that out when they're interacting with children let's say for the sake of argument. There's other issues, and then you might say well if he's a good parent what does he have to do to be a good parent? Well he has to feed his children so he probably needs a job, and it would be better if it was a good job. So he's got a good job and that's part of being a good person. And then maybe he can care for his family and so care might be regarded as a more specific subset of good parent, and so you can decompose caring to, let's say, play with baby, and then you can decompose play into - well I decomposed it into peek, tickle, and clean. What's interesting about this is those are all abstractions, but once you get down to a high enough level of resolution, they're no longer abstractions in that they're actually actions you undertake in the world. Moving your hand is not an abstraction. So at some point - and this is a nice elegant solution to the mind body problem to some degree. At some level of resolution - high resolution - it stops being conceptual and starts being action, and that's where the mind hits the world. If you go into an even higher level of resolution than that, like what do you have to do to move your hand? The answer to that is you don't know. You just do it. And so your consciousness bottoms out, in some sense, at the level of motor activity. So there's a level above which you can't perceive which are the networks that you're involved in and there's a level below which you can't perceive, which is under normal circumstances, procedural control which is whatever enables you to actually move. So then you might say well what are all of these things. How would you conceptualize a decomposed good person. Well then you might say well what are all these things made out of? In a sense, what are their constituent elements? Good person, good parent, family care, play with baby. They're sort of like games. They're sort of like stories. They're sort of like rituals. I think about them in these terms, so if you look at - that's where we get to this particular diagram which we're gonna concentrate on quite a bit. Let me shift to it and we'll talk about that. Now I don't exactly know how to - what to call this thing. I think the best way of thinking about it is it's a subpersonality and that the reason I call it a subpersonality is because only a personality has all the attributes that this thing has and so the attributes are. I talked to you last week about the fact that the Russian neuropsychologist for example felt that people had to build models of the world and so you can call this a model of the world. So the reason they suspected that was because if you brought someone - I think I ran through this - if you bring someone into a laboratory and you play them a tone, when they first hear the tone they manifest an orienting reflex which is a change in skin conduction, and that's actually a consequence of neurological activity. And then if you play the tone a bunch, they stop having the reaction and then if you vary the tone on any perceptible dimension, the orienting reflex returns, and so the inference from that is obviously the person must be constructing a model of the tone because otherwise how would they know if something deviated from it, especially on all those dimensions. So not only is it a model, it's a multi-dimensional model. Okay, now the upshot of that is for a long time, people tried to figure out how in the world we model the world, and then they tried to figure out how to make smart machines that modeled the world that could then plan their actions in the modeled world and then could act in the world as a consequence. They got nowhere with that because it turned out that the world is so damn complex that if you're gonna model it, you're gonna spend all the time modeling. You're not gonna spend your time acting in it and you're not gonna get anywhere. It's partly because the world is almost infinitely complex, and so if you're trying to get a computer to look at the world, you might say well what is the computer supposed to look at? Everything. Well, no. I mean, you look at a lot in some ways, and not very much in others, and half your brain is dedicated, roughly speaking, to visual processing. Then you've got your other senses to help you figure out what's going on. But you don't build a model of the whole world. You don't build any model at all of the parts of the world that aren't relevant to you. For example, your model of this floor is very low resolution. If I took you guys out in the hallway, assuming the hallway floor isn't the same color and I said, what was the color of this floor. You would not be able to tell me, and the reason for that is who cares. It could be shifting color all the time while you're sitting here, you know, subtly, and you're not gonna care. The reason for that is you're not falling through it, and it isn't moving. So it's like an invisible presupposition of your current knowledge structure. And there's all sorts of things going on around you that are like that. You don't pay attention to the walls. You really don't pay attention to the people that are around you. They could sort themselves in a different way. You wouldn't notice unless you know the person. There's also all sorts of things that you don't model. Now you've all seen the invisible gorilla video, I presume. Everyone's seen that. Is there anyone here who hasn't seen that video. Okay good. So that's something eh. It's really something that there's a psychology experiment that's so well known you can talk to a crowd now and almost everyone's seen it. It's so shocking. It's like, of course I can see a gorilla if one was dancing around on a basketball court. It's like, ha no you wouldn't. Or there's a fifty percent chance you wouldn't. Now the reason for that is, fundamentally speaking, is you're given a task when you watch that video, and the task is to count the number of times the ball is thrown by the team in black. All of a sudden, your perceptual systems reorient themselves and you're not really looking at people. You're looking at something that might be animated stick figures who are engaged, momentarily, in moving the object of perceptual importance around. So you can blur them out, which you do because obviously you can't tell the difference between a gorilla and the person dressed in black. The reason you can't is you don't need to. In order to fulfill the task, you can treat all the people like vaguely moving black objects, and as long as that doesn't interfere with your counting, then it's irrelevant. So actually, you don't build a model of the whole world. And you build a model of only the parts of the world that are relevant to your ongoing micro action. Now the problem that brings up is how do you know what's relevant. Well that's a tough question. I would say, the reason you know what's relevant is because some things don't change over time, and you've been evolving through three and a half billion years. So you've built yourself. If we go back to that other diagram, you can imagine the levels there from the micro activities to the abstractions. You think about how much building had to go in so you could undertake those microactions. So like, here you can move your hand. Well that's great. How do you get the hand? Well, you know, it took a long time. It took almost all of the three and a half billion years before you managed to come up with a hand. So, even underneath the microactions, there's this massive evolutionary history that's been built up partially as a consequence of some of the unchanging features of the environment, or at least in consequence to some of the slower changing features of the environment that has given you this incredibly complex body that's really good at doing some things and not really good at doing other things at all. And so, that's how you solve the relevance problem, and I actually think it's one of the most powerful arguments for the necessity of evolutionary theory. It's like this problem is so complex because it's not only how you have to adapt to the environment across time. So you have to build a body that adapts to the environment. It's worse than that. It's like the train passing through the box. The environment is not stable. It keeps shifting and turning and moving and twisting, and so not only do you have to adapt to the environment, you have to adapt flexibly to the environment while it transforms itself at different levels of totality because sometimes there's minor changes to the environment. Sometimes a meteor hits the Earth and we're plunged into darkness for four years, or there's an ice age or something like that. So the levels of transformation in the environment can be radical and the evolutionary process has to keep up with that. The way it works, apparently, like I don't believe this is the whole story although it's more or less the whole Darwinian story is that something more or less works and it makes a million copies of itself and there's tiny variations in those copies often at least in principle because of copying error which is where I think the theory is weak. And then they all die except for two. And so, why didn't those die, and the answer is well they happened by chance to vary in the direction that the environment varied and so they get to continue and so the reason evolution works is that everything dies. Everything fails because you think well, keeping up with a randomly changing environment is impossible, so how do you do it? Well you do a million things. Most of them don't work, but you only have to succeed enough to propagate yourself once. Now, so I think that that's not exactly right because I don't believe that our understanding of evolution is complete. There's a bunch of things that I don't believe in. One is DNA is pretty damn complex. It's not obvious how it could have evolved, and even the people who discovered DNA were very very complexed that it existed. So one of them - and I told you this - thought that it came from outer space and that it had evolved from somewhere else. You might think about that as crazy theory but cosmic winds, like solar winds and that kind of thing, can propel tiny things vast distances relatively rapidly, and over 13.5 billion years you can really get around. I think the estimates, even if you used sub - if you used transportation methods that are about the speed that we have, you can colonize the whole galaxy in some like 20 million years because it's exponential. 20 million years is a tiny tiny subset of 3.5 billion years so it's not as far fetched as it sounds. The problem is it doesn't address the problem. Okay it came from somewhere else, but how did it get there? It just pushes the problem back. But there's this other issue too which is called epigenesis, and that's really put an old spoke in the scientific wheels in the last twenty years because the theory was, twenty years ago, that all evolution preceded through random mutation, and it was random. But it turns out that's not exactly right because there had been a number of demonstrations that if something happens to generation A, that will produce a transformation in the genetic information that's transferred to generation B. And the transformation often seems not merely as a consequence of damage, but actually a form of adaptation to the new environment. Now that's a tough one, like twenty years ago when I was studying evolutionary psychology and evolutionary biology, if someone would have said, well you can transmit acquired characteristics, it would have been like you're over there with the creationists because that was no go. That was against the rules. But it does happen, and the fact that epigenesis happens at all means that there's a lot of things about how DNA works that we don't know. I actually think what's happening is that DNA is a very very complex microcomputer, and I don't know exactly how it operates, maybe it's a quantum computer. It's very complex. Remember it's had three and a half billion years to figure out what's going on, and it's pretty good at surviving. So you don't want to underestimate it, and the structures it builds at the molecular level are so complex it just - if you - there's some great animations of those things going on at the molecular level on the net. They're so complex that you can't help but think of them as computational when you watch them. They're not random processes man. Like I watched the little molecule that checks for error in a DNA replication string. I mean, it checks for errors in a DNA replication string man. To figure out how it does something like that without some form of computation strikes me as impossible. Anyways I think what happens is that over time the DNA plays, like it can manifest itself in many different forms and it also capitalizes on mutation. I think that's how it works. Now you know there's other I'd say kind of weak evidence for that. Maybe it's only evidence by analogy but if I take one of you and I put you in a radically new environment, new genes will turn on in your brain and code for new proteins and so it's like you're sitting there but in some sense there's a whole set of potential yous that are sitting there. A lot of that potential is actually locked in the genetic code. I mean, it's dependant on the information that's in the environment around it cause it's not all in the code but it's enough to get the process started. So if I take you out of situation A and put you in situation B, you build new brain structures at the microlevel. So you're actually a different person. That's actually a very interesting way of thinking about the consequences of something like exposure in psychotherapy. It's like okay, you're all timid and there's eighteen things you're terrified of. You go out and master one of them. It's like poof, your brain is the not the same. Maybe you're a little braver. And then you go master another one, and a bunch more of you turns on. Now I don't know if one thing turns on, something else turns off. You know what I mean is that there's only so much of you that can be turned on at any one time, but maybe a lot of more you can be turned on than is turned on, so. I think it looks like that because people who really challenge themselves across the span of their life, they develop talents in multiple directions. People can really be amazingly good at a ridiculous number of things. Okay so, Sokolov and Vinogradova showed that you model the world right down to the finest details, but then Dan Simon and his crew showed "No you don't, you're so blind you can't even believe it." It's like okay, those are not the same set of facts, so how do we reconcile that? Well here's one way of getting a bit of sense of it. Look straight ahead. Okay, now concentrate not on what you see in the middle of your vision but at the sides. It's probably better if you look at a person to do that, but it doesn't really matter though. So look straight ahead but pay attention to what you see in the periphery. So I can tell you what you'll see because some of it is very difficult to detect. Way out in the periphery, it's black and white. You can't tell that though. But we know that because if we change colors way out in the periphery on you, you can't detect a change. And then out to about here, if something isn't moving, it's almost impossible to see it. But as soon as it moves, you can see that there's something moving. Sort of like dinosaur vision. Remember Jurassic Park? Don't move because the dinosaur can see you. It's like well, you have dinosaur movement detector still built into your nervous system. And the answer is why, and the answer is well if you can't afford to have a lot of your brain wired up in the periphery of your vision because your head is only so big, then you have to concentrate on only those things that are most likely to be relevant. And moving things are more likely to be relevant because they can eat you. Moving things are more likely to be relevant than stationary things especially if you've been in the environment for a while right, because if you're in here it's like the stationary things are going to stay stationary so you can ignore them. You don't even have to see them, but the moving things, they're transforming at a time rate that's relevant to you so it's good to be able to detect those. Now the periphery of your vision is actually wired in more directly to your - to the lower levels of your nervous system. So it can trigger off things like startle reflexes which are very rapid, and it can also trigger an orienting response which is the movement of your sensory systems in the direction of the stimulus so if something over here moves, then you go like that, and then what you're doing is you're nailing it with your central vision. Now, out in your peripheral vision, if you follow the optical tract back to your brain, you'll see the peripheral retinal nerves don't attach to a tremendous number of visual cortex neurons, but the central ones do so each of the central neurons in your central vision - the fovea. Each one of those is connected to ten thousand neurons at the first level of elaboration, and then each neuron is connected to about ten thousand other neurons. So it's ten thousand to the ten thousandth two neurons in and so a lot of your brain is focusing on that tiny little pinpoint that you use that's foveal vision, and it seems to be about big enough so that you can bring a face into high resolution in the center and you can track the movement of the various elements of the faces. If you look at someone and you look about eighteen inches to their left or to their right, you'll see that you can't see their nose anymore. You see kind of a vague outline of their face. You can still see the color. You can detect their eyebrows, and you can detect their mouth especially if their mouth moves or their eyes move. You just zero in on that right away. What's happening is that way out here, your vision is incredibly low resolution and the resolution increases to the center where it's very very high, and then there's some tweaks like okay you can't really see out here, but you can see motion, and that's good enough because as soon as something moves, you can turn your head cause you can turn your head and your eyes and you can focus that little pinpoint on it and dance around cause that's what you do with the pinpoint. It moves around very rapidly, and you can scan that central area with high resolution. So it's an efficient use of limited resources. So partly the way that you manage in the world which is very very complicated, is that even your senses simplify it for you. There's only - you can't see the entire spectrum of electromagnetic radiation. You can only see the visual light spectrum. It's very narrow. There's a whole range of sounds you can't hear. There's things you can't smell. So you're in a box and some things get through, but not everything. So that simplifies things for you right off the bat and hypothetically those things you do detect or those things where it was necessary for you to detect for you to be here, over this vast span of time and no doubt there were variants all the way through that tried to parse it up differently - slightly differently - and that didn't work out as well so they aren't around. So you're around because of death and replication. So it's an interesting take on death, eh, because you're the product of an unbelievable number of deaths. Right, because all of those experiments had to take place in some sense for you to be here at all. So anyways, okay, then, so you can see with your central vision that you focus in on one point and you reduce the others to low resolution representations, maybe even cartoons, and then I also think, although I don't know this for sure and someone has undoubtedly done the work. My suspicions are that in the periphery, you don't update - you know how your screen updates. It's sixty cycles a second, something like that. You update your vision at about sixty cycles per second, and we know that because if the screen resolution or if the screen update decreases below sixty cycles a second, people can start to see it flicker. So we have a refresh rate. It's around sixty hertz. Some people can see flicker at higher hertz than that, but most people can't. Sixty is about right. So, that's another way that you deal with the fact that there's way too much for you to deal with. Your temporal resolution isn't very high, you know, so the smallest meaningful event for you is about a tenth of a second long. Now if you're in a car accident or you're in some situation where it's an emergency and you get a massive burst of dopamine, you might be able to speed that processing up by a hundredfold. Who knows? But you're gonna be absolutely exhausted instantly when you do that. I don't know if you've ever experienced that in a car accident or something like that but people often report that time slows down dramatically, but then afterwards they're just done. So the reason you don't see a thousand times as fast as you do is because you'd have to be eating like a hummingbird right. You'd need a big vat of nectar attached to you, and you'd just be sipping on it or gulping it down nonstop. So you're also restricted in terms of your temporal resolution. Okay, well then what else do you do to simplify the world. Well this is where the tool concept of concept, the tool concept of concept starts to become useful because you're actually aiming at things all the time, and I really like the aim metaphor because if you understand the metaphor well, it really sheds some light on what human beings are like. Chimps are hunters, but they're not hunters like human beings are hunters. We're really really good hunters. Chimps, they have to kind of mob an animal and then they'll tear it apart, and they like meat so they'll definitely do it. But human beings have been hunting in an unbelievably sophisticated way for a tremendous amount of time, and there's a bunch of things about us that aren't like chimps. So one is we can throw, and our bodies are built for throwing. Now you might think well that's not that relevant but if something is chasing you through the bush and you can throw a rock at it, it becomes relevant very quickly. And so we're really good at taking projectiles, specifying targets, and hurling the projectiles at targets. And we can do that with rocks, and we can do it with bows, and we can do it with rifles, and we can do it with rifles, and we can do it with nuclear weapons. And so there's something about us that's obsessed with hitting the middle of the target. Now there's an interesting side note for that which is that the word sin is derived from the Greek word "Hamartia," and hamartia is an archery term to mean to miss the center of the target. Now that's something very much worth thinking about. It's a very lovely concordance. So we're built on this hunting platform. We can track moving things extraordinarily well. We have amazing eyesight. Our eyesight's better than any primate by a huge amount, and better than any other creature except for hawks and other birds of prey. So, and, we also use - so we have this intense, amazing capacity to zero in and here's some cool things about your eyes. So, if you look at a gorilla, you'll see that a gorilla doesn't really have whites in their eyes, and you might think well that's kind of weird because we do, and so what's the hypothesis? Well, if I'm looking at somebody at the back of the room, I can tell if they're looking at my eyes. If they're looking at my nose, it's almost as if their face just gets a little bit vaguer like we're not communicating. It's eye to eye contact. So our ability to specify the direction in which another person's eyes are pointing is phenomenal. And you might say, well why? Well first of all, there's a lot of expression around the eyes right. So you can imagine coevolution. The coevolution is sharper and sharper vision. Vision associated with detecting eyes and then also more and more evolution for emotional expression around the eyes. So there's that. But then, the other thing that I wanted - the reason that I would be interested in that is because I want to know what the hell you're up to because maybe you're a friend and maybe you're a foe or maybe you're interested in something that I should be interested in. So we know what people are like in that regard, so you go stand out in the corner and you look up, and soon there are ten people you have around you looking up. And why is that? It's because when they see where your eyes are pointed and embody you, they think well that person - they don't think this. It's the equivalent of thinking. They think well that person must be looking at something interesting because that's what people look at, and if it's interesting to them then it's probably going to be interesting to me especially if it's in the sky. It's like what the hell, that's not supposed to be happening. So you're looking at people's eyes because you want to know what they're up to in their facial display, which is your face is unbelievably innervated and controllable, both by conscious and by unconscious means. That tells you what they're up to, which is why you want to see someone's face. You don't talk to the back of their head. You want to talk to their face, and you don't like it when they're looking like this or looking like that or failing to make eye contact. Although too much eye contact is a predatory stare. So you know, you've got - Well you've got to get the balance right. So now, what about the whites of the eyes? Well the theory is that the reason we've developed whites is because it was easier to see where someone's eyes were pointed if there was a dark circle in a white space, and what that basically meant was that all your ancestors who were a little less fortunate on the eye white side either didn't mate or got killed. Probably in misunderstandings. So, our eyes stand out against this bright white background because that helps us - that helps other people detect what we're up to, and that means we can trust each other more easily and we can - even as something as simple as like eye contact in a situation where there's a possibility of finding a sexual partner is a very important component of that because eye contact indicates interest and it also indicates, at least in principle, the possibility of approach. And so approach is dopaminergically mediated and it's a positive emotional state. And that's also why, interestingly enough, if you go into a pharmacy, and there's a rack of magazines, and they're - what's on the cover? Always. Almost always. Beautiful women. Like on fifty percent of the men's magazines there's a beautiful woman and on like a hundred percent of the women's magazines which is really interesting you know because you might think well why is that? Women's eyes are always looking out in a way that they're looking at you. So there was some interest - so it's an invocation of interest, and so, you know, magazines evolve. All the ones that don't get bought fail. And so what's happened is they've all converged to the same point, and the same point is that the thing that's maximally interesting to a magazine purchaser is a beautiful female face. Whether it's male or female. Now on the male side, there's also gadgets of all sorts. And that may be that men are more gadgets oriented than women. So anyways, and we also know that for example with men, if you show them - this is a funny little study. So you show them a face of a beautiful woman and her eyes are looking that way, or this way or they're looking right at him, you can check the activity in the dopaminergic center in a place called the nucleus accumbens which is the same that cocaine hits. Face on eye contact, that thing lights up. It lights up even more if she's wearing a red dress. Right, and you can get the same kind of lighting up with a red curvy sports car. Yeah. So it's the, you know - my thought when I read that was the perfect situation is like a beautiful girl dressed in red perched on a sports car, with some cocaine. Why red? Why red? That's a good question. I'm not exactly sure why - oh that's wrong. I do know why red. Ripe fruit. Women have coevolved with ripe fruit. It's very sneaky of you by the way. So that's why - you know that too. You just have to leaf through a women's magazine. Lipstick is always associated with like apples that are glistening in some way, or a peach or something like that. And we were primarily fruit eaters, and the reason we have color vision is to detect fruit, ripe fruit. So part of the reason that - also part of the reason that fruit turns red or colors when it ripens is because the fruit that was successfully eaten by creatures that distributed the seeds was the fruit that was ripe when it was eaten. So as the color vision evolved, maybe there was a red tint for only god knows what reason, then a positive feedback loop developed and fruit got redder and redder, and at the same time, women capitalized on that. So that's partly, I think, what explains the association between Eve and the apple in Genesis because Genesis is also a story about gaining sight. So yeah, that's why red. That's pretty funny. I really think that's pretty funny. You know, evolved sensory significance is absolutely everywhere. It's so deep inside of us. Yeah. I have to wonder about blood too, that seems like it also Oh yeah, yeah. Red's a significant color, but I think - I mean and it's funny too because say there's a flushed face, well that means it's infused with blood. It's also a sign of health. It's also a sign of sexual arousal. But it is a sign of health, and so you see in old Coke ads from the 1930's, the girl's cheeks are so red it looks like she has a fever. So it's a form of sexual signalling that indicates health. So that's another part. I mean these are multiply determined right, as anything as complex as vision. Yeah, and blood means "Hey, maybe don't go there" or maybe it means there's something to eat. Right, right. Yup. There was another theory with color sight, and it had to do with people's facial expressions - not expressions but depending on whether you're angry or aroused. Oh definitely, you can see that those things would loop together. Once the color vision starts to adapt, the color vision for fruit is way older, I would suspect, because when we developed it, we had fur. But once the ability's there and we lose our facial fur, it's possible to capitalize on the ability to detect the signalling. And you know, we're talking about a transformation that's over about - we were living in trees about sixty million years ago. So the transition between us and them is sixty million years. The separation between chimps is about seven. And you know, chimp skin is so dark, you're not gonna get a lot of signalling. Okay so, back to this little diagram. Now here's the idea. This is deeply informed, although I didn't know it when I was working on these ideas, this is deeply informed by a guy named Norbert Wiener who was one of the twentieth century's massive geniuses and a force behind the development of computation. So this is a cybernetic model. He invented cybernetics. Now I didn't learn this from Norbert Wiener because I learned it from Jeffrey Gray, but Jeffrey Gray's source had learned it from Norbert Wiener way back in the 1940's. In fact there was a convention back in the 1940's that Wiener presented many of his ideas at that many psychologists attended, including Jean Piaget. So Piaget's theory is very much influenced by cybernetics as well. Many many of the standard psychology cognitive models are cybernetic. So they're grounded in thinking that's grounded in the engineering thinking and not psychological thinking at all. Yup. Isn't Humberd's book called Cybernetics? No, Dianetics. Yeah, yeah. Okay so, how might you conceptualize the fundamental elements of a personality. Well, this is what it looks like to me. The first thing is you're a moving creature. So here's a funny story. There's a little animal whose name I forget, and in its - it's an ocean animal - in its juvenile state, it swims around. Okay so in its juvenile state, it has to coordinate its movements and interact with the changing environment. So it has a brain. But when it turns into an adult, it attaches itself to a rock and turns into something like a piece of coral. It promptly digests its own brain. So the issue is unless you don't really need a brain if you're not gonna go anywhere right. So a brain is a going places thing, and we have a very big brain and so it's like we're always zooming around doing things, and we've got these hands that enable us to manipulate things and transform things. So the brain is for doing things, it's not just for perceiving. Roughly speaking, the back half of your brain is for perception, the cortical part. Mostly visual perception, but some auditory and touch. A lot of visual, and the front part is for output. Motor action. And as you proceed - imagine the front part starts halfway here. As you proceed from the midline forward, the action becomes more and more abstract until when you're dealing with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, you're thinking abstractly. Now people think that when they're thinking abstractly, they're thinking about representations of the world because we think about objects, but that isn't what we're doing. What we're doing is rehearsing potential schemas of action. So we have this abstract space, which you might think about as a duplicate world. You have an idea. You test the idea like you would test it if you were acting in the world, and the consequence of the imaginary testing is if you encounter grief, then you don't implement the idea in the world. Now you know, that doesn't always work because there's trade offs between short term pleasure and long term punishment that makes it complicated, but what seems to have happened is that as we've evolved, we're very sneaky creatures you know. For billions of years, the only way that you could figure out whether you're right or wrong was to go out and do something, and if you died you were wrong. But now, you can think about doing something and if the consequence of running the simulation in your head is that you die, then you don't do it. So what you're basically doing is spinning off multiple potential use in multiple potential universes and running them as simulations. Now we really do that now because we've externalized it onto the computer which is what we're doing with really really complex video games. So it's so smart. It's an amazing evolutionary advance. Now it doesn't work that well because sometimes you run the simulation and you think, this is a stupid idea, and you promptly have eight beers so that you can go do it. But, all things considered, that's still what this abstract space is for. I should tell you something about this too because you're gonna hear from neuropsychologists that a lot of what the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex does is - the cortex in general - is impulse control, and that's wrong. That is not what it does. And part of the reason I know this is because the correlation between prefrontal cortical cognitive ability which is very tightly associated with IQ by the way. The correlation is like 0.9 so you can even argue it's the same thing. Fluid IQ in particular. The correlation between dorsolateral prefrontal cognitive capacity and conscientiousness which is like long term goal directed, future oriented, planned activity is zero. Okay zero is a very bad correlation. You know the old idea, correlation doesn't imply causality. Well, wrong. It does strongly imply causality. It doesn't demonstrate it because with every causal relationship, there's a correlation so a hundred percent of causally related items have a correlation right. A hundred percent correlation. Well not necessarily, but it implies correlation but it does not prove it. But zero. That's bad. That means those things aren't related. Now, if you think about it, you can understand why. They have to be unrelated because if you embodied your abstractions, then you wouldn't be able to experiment with them. You'd just act them out and then bang you'd be dead. So you have to separate the cognitive activity from the embodiment completely so you can choose which of your potential selves to incarnate so to speak. Now, the prefrontal cortex is a complex place, and the lower parts of it seem to be more related to the relation between cognitive activity and the control of behavior. But we have tried fifty tasks, I bet, trying to get a correlation with conscientiousness and we haven't found one. We cannot. The reason I'm telling you this is because conscientiousness is a very good predictor of long term life success. You guys get your grades for two reasons. One, you're smart - assuming you are - and two, that you work hard - assuming that you do. That eats up almost all the variance in your grades. Creativity is zero correlation with grades at U of T, by the way which I think is extraordinarily comical, and completely unsurprising. It's hard for an institution to grade creativity cause it's an institution, and the problem with being creative is that you force people to come up with a new grading scheme. It's like no, they're not gonna do that. Right, because you come up with something creative, it's different. Well what do you do with that? You say, don't do that. That's not what I want, even if it's a great thing. It's like yeah yeah, take your great thing and go somewhere else with it. I've got five minutes to mark your damn paper. So anyways, this capacity for abstraction is divorced almost completely from embodiment, and that's a good thing because that allows us to experiment. But it's a bad thing because actually doing the embodiment turns out to be very difficult. It's like your body's got all these habits built into it that you've been working on for a long time. Here's another piece of advice. Do not practice things that you don't want to become because one of the things that happens. Let's say you take Danish speakers and you play Danish backwards to them, and you do a scan of brain activity. It's like their brain's lighting up like mad because they don't know how to say Danish backwards, so you get a whole bunch of brain involved in a new task. But then as you practice the task, and routinize it, less and less brain is involved. So what happens is - this is in your standard, right-hand male and the reason I'm doing that as an example is that's kind of the simplest default brain in a sense. Women are more diffusely organized, and so it's harder to exactly talk about their neurological structure in a simple way, but in a right-handed male, what happens is the activity starts to shift to the left, and then it shifts backwards, and as it does so, the amount of tissue that gets activated gets smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller until you've built a little machine that takes care of that sort of thing. But the thing about that machine is that it's a machine. It's a habit, and it's actually there. It's built into you. So be careful what you practise because if you practise it enough, it becomes - it's like it's you. It's the default you. And then if you want to change it, you can't just undo that stupid machine. It's there permanently. What you have to do is you have to build another little machine that shuts it off, and then another machine that does the other thing, and then if you get stressed the little machine that shuts the first machine off will stop working and back your stupid habit will come. So, people used to talk about the development of character, and there was something about that that was absolutely right because character is how you build yourself across time, and it really really matters. Only practise what you want to become. If you practise other things, then well you'll become them. That's not so good. Okay, so back to this. Now, Gray and Sokolov and Vinogradova. We're gonna talk about them for a minute. Now, they used to talk about animals. They're mostly thinking about animals - rats, mostly - as having an expectancy model. So you take a rat. You throw him in a new environment. What does he do? Well the first he does is freeze because god only knows what's out there. So it's like paralyzed rat; he's just seen the Medusa. He's paralyzed, and then if nothing attacks him, he starts to calm down a bit and then he'll start sniffing because rats are all smell. And he sniffs around, and he's trying to detect cats, say. Now, rats have such a good sense of smell. If a rat eats somethign that makes it sick, it'll never eat it again. But, if a rat smells the breath of a rat that ate something that made it sick, he won't eat that either. Right, so rats eh. Man, they can smell things. And animals are built around a smell brain, so they're a lot different than us. We have - did I tell you about the t-shirt study of symmetrical men? Oh that's a funny one. So we know that one of the things that signify physical beauty is symmetry, and the reason for that is that all things considered, symmetrical people are more healthy than asymmetrical people. Asymmetry indicates taht somethings gone wrong somewhere in the process of development. So, we like symmetry and beauty. And that's fine. That's all the way across the animal kingdom. So butterflies. There are butterflies that wont mate with another butterfly if it deviates from symmetry some absurdly tiny amount. Like really, it's micro measurement deviation. I gues they have a butterfly template and if you know, the potential mating butterfly doesn't match, it's like flitter off. You're not getting anywhere. So, that's fine. So symmetry. This researcher, god only knows what possessed him, took a bunch of men, ranging from symmetrical to asymmetrical - judged by a panel - and then he had them shower and then he had them wear a t-shirt for like four hours. And then, he gave these t-shirts to women and he said okay rate the scent of the t-shirt from positive to negative. Well the women overwhelmingly preferred the symmetrical guys. Yeah, no kidding eh. So you just bloody well never know what's behind that attraction. We know some things. Symmetry's a big one, but there's a bunch of other ones too. I was just wondering how that would correlate with - I know attraction to smells also has to do with your optimal mate. Oh yeah, there's a bunch of things. Here's another study - this is a cool one. This is one of the few psychological facts. We don't have many psychological facts, you know. We have a lot of hypotheses about things but this is as close to a fact as we've ever got. So, back decades ago, these Israeli children were raised in kibbutzim, and those were basically - they were basically daycare for kids. Group day care. But the kids were more separated from the parents than they might be in a regular day care. Anyways, all the Israeli kids were in these kibbutzim, and so then we have detailed marriage records of the kids. You know that people very seldom marry their siblings, and they're very seldomly in a sexual relationship with their siblings, and you might say well why is that. It's the case across cultures, with very specific exceptions like often high rank nobility - they have an option. Generally speaking, there's a powerful incest taboo, as well as between parents and children. So, some researcher decided well how do you know who you're sibling is, you know roughly speaking. What exactly is it that's not turning you on, let's say. Well so they checked out the kibbutzim records and they found that Israeli children who were raised in the same kibbutzim never married each other. Whatever happened seemed to - it was as if that close, close contact in the very early years triggered whatever the sibling anti-response is and that was that. It's probably smell. That would be my guess. Now, there's also another study. One of the things they found with mice - I hope it's mice - is that mice will not mate - is that right? Okay, I'm gonna garble this up but it doesn't matter because the underlying point is valid even though I'm gonna mess up the details. Animal studies indicated, if I remembered correctly, that mice will not mate with other mice who have an RH factor that would increase the probability of a miscarriage. And neither will women, well not with mice obviously, but women do not like the smell of men who have RH factors that in combination with theirs will produce suboptimal offspring, and when you ask them why they don't like the smell, they say that it's like my brother. Something like that. So anyways, that's quite remarkable. Now back to the rats and the expectancy model. We already know that you can get an orienting response out of a human being if something deviates from expectancy. Now people started studying this in rats, and the original conceptualization was expectation. So you have an expectation about how the world is gonna lay itself out. That's your model, and then if the world deviates from that, you have an orienting reflex and what that does is protect you from predation. That's the first level of the orienting response. It's really, really primitive. It's mediated only by a few neuronal connections so it's unbelievably rapid. Then after that, there's anxiety and the proclivity to explore. That both gets activated. So it's first protective, then you orient towards the - imagine you're walking down the street and hear a really loud noise behind you. It's like really loud, so it startles you. Well you go into a crouch so that if a tiger had jumped on your back, it would be hard for it to get your neck, and then tenths of a second later, you'll turn assuming you don't get attacked by a tiger, you'll swivel and turn and orient all your senses towards the locale that was specified by the sound because you have a stereo auditory system and you can localize events in space using that. So you orient towards it - that's part of the orienting reflex. It's a reflex. It's not voluntary. So, and then once you've got your eyes trained on it, and your ears, then you start to explore it and then you might freeze. You might get out of there which is a panic response. That's another thing that could be triggered by the orienting reflex. Different circuit. Or you might think, "Wow, what's going on over there? It looks interesting." And then you go approach it. Now, those two - the exploratory part is mediated in part by the hypothalamus which is a very very old system, and it has a whole section, about half of it is devoted to the circuitry that you would use to figure out what was going on if something that you didn't understood happened. And then you have a whole other circuit that's hippocampal and amygdalic that regulates the exploratory circuit and says be careful because while you're gathering information, you might get killed and the anxiety circuit takes primacy, generally speaking, over the exploratory circuit. And the reason for that is you don't want to get information and be dead so caution is the watchword. Now, the other thing you might think about which is an extremely useful thing to think about. Okay let's go back to that diagram I showed you with the hierarchy. Right, so you've got the motor actions at the bottom, and you've got the high level abstractions at the top. So, you're tickling the baby and somebody comes home and says if you tickle the baby this way, the baby has more fun. And so how do you respond to that? Well maybe you're a little peeved because you're doing perfectly fine with this baby and someone's coming and altering your tickling micro personality, and you know, if you're irritable you'll say well why don't you just go off and find a baby of your own to play with. And if you're not that irritable, you might say well okay show me what to do. There'll be a tinge of negative emotion there, generally speaking, depending on how the person has approached you but your self concept can probably handle a micro change to your tickling routine. Okay, so that's gonna produce only a little bit of anxiety and irritation and the reason for that is that the threat to you is proportionate to the magnitude of the system that's being modified by the challenge. Now this is really useful to know, okay, practically, and this is why. Let's say you're having an argument with your partner and you say, you're a stupid person and you've always been a stupid person and as far as I can tell, as far into the future as I can see, you're going to remain a stupid person. So what are they supposed to do? What are they gonna do when you say that? They're gonna cry like if you mean it. They're gonna get angry if you mean it, and they'll not like you very much, and why is that? Well it's like, it's assault basically. The only thing you can do in a situation like that is walk away, ignore it, respond in kind, or it degenerates into violence. That's it because there's no discussion. You haven't left the person anywhere to go. You've gone right to the top of their hierarchy and said everything about you is wrong, and worse than that, all the mechanisms that we could use to correct it won't work. So, those are fighting words. So don't do that unless you want to have a fight. So then you might say, well what would you do instead? And the answer is deliver the least amount of information you possibly can, and so let's say you come home and your person is watching TV, and you were kind of hoping they'd greet you at the door. You shouldn't break down into tears and say you're a stupid person, you've always been a stupid person, and you're gonna be a stupid person in the future. You should say, I have this peculiarity and that is when I come home, I don't have enough confidence to just be happy. I would like you to come and say - just shut the TV off for two minutes, come to the front door and say "Hello", and then you can go back and watch your TV. Would it be okay if you did that? And they'll think, "Okay you'll have to pay for it somehow," but then they'll probably do it. But the thing is you've got to specify the routine that you want transformed at the highest possible level of resolution, and you want to recommend the minimal necessary change that will satisfy you. So you can't say, "If you love me, you'd know how to greet me at the door." Ha. Not helpful because they're stupid. Right, and so are you. So you have to spell it out. It's like what do you want. Exactly, what would make you satisfied, and then you have to have your person grudgingly practice that a few times and you have to let them do it very badly and also in a bad temper, and then you'd have to reward them for it and then maybe three months later, they'll do it properly. So you need to know that because that's what people are like. It's very hard for them to learn new things, and they're very resistant to it, but they're very responsive to reward. So another thing - this is partly what B.F. Skinner figured out so, when he was training rats and he wanted a rat to do something, one of the things he would do is put - maybe he was gonna train the rat to climb up a little ladder, and I mean he can get rats to climb ladders and climb across the little monkey bars and then spin around three times and then, you know, whack a ball and then eat something, like he got incredibly complex behavior out of rats. And the way he did that was patience. So he put the ladder in the cage, and the rat would just run around doing rat things, and it would put its hand on the first rung, and Skinner would give it a pellet, and so after even once, the rat's gonna be like standing in the immediate vicinity of the ladder and then the frequency with which its gonna go like this has just increased so its gonna do it again. Bang, pellet. Well soon the rat's just going like this, right? So then, you wait until the rat tries the other hand. So you give it a pellet then. Well then it's going like this and then because it's going to get bored, it'll go like this. It'll hit the next stair. Bang, you give it a pellet. Soon the rat is climbing and doing all the little things he wanted to do. Now the problem with that is you have to be patient. You have to wait until the rat does what you want. Okay that's more relationship advice. Wait till the rat does what you want, and then reward it, and it's unbelievably useful. It's also extraordinarily positive. I mean I'm being, you know, comical, insofar as I can manage that, about the situation, but people love reward and they love attention. People love attention more than anything else, and so if you watch through the day, and when your partner does something that's good, say "Bam, that was good" or something like that. You can be inventive, and then they'll do it more, and if you do that a whole bunch like for a year, they'll be doing things that are good for you just all the time. But you have to be patient, which is very annoying and you have to suppress your response to only respond to negative things, you know, because what we know about the expectancy models is that a deviation from expectation produces a burst of negative emotion. So you come home, and the whole house is clean, but there's like - I don't know - the dog has shed on the rug or something and the person overlooked that. It's like you're not gonna see the clean house, you're gonna see the rug with the dog fur on it and you're gonna say "Why didn't you clean up the rug with the dog fur?" And they're gonna say, "Good luck getting me to clean the house again." And you know, because the thing is the exception stands out and what's done doesn't, and the reason for that is you can just ignore what's done because it's done. It doesn't get in your way. So it just gets invisible really quickly. So you really gotta watch that tendency. One of the things Nietzsche said was that if you really want to punish someone, you don't punish them when they do something wrong because they expect that. That's not a punishment, they expect that. They might even be relieved by it. You want to punish them when they do something right because then you'll really hurt them. So that's something to think about, if you're in a relationship man. If someone's done something right, do not punish them. You do that two or three times and that's it man. You're not gonna get them to do that anymore. So, judiciousness. Watch what they're doing. If something happens that's good, notice it, and you know, if they've done a bunch of things don't concentrate on the things they did wrong. That's not smart. It's really hard on them too. In some sense this sounds manipulative and selfish, you know, because I'm teaching you how to train your partner, but you should also teach them how to train you because it would be really nice if you could come home and the person would say, "Well what did you do today?" and you say "Here's a bunch of things I did." and they say "Well this looks really good, and that was great, and why don't you do some more of that?" And you're like "Oh boy," it was a great day. So, you can train them to train you properly, and that's a really helpful thing especially when you do it over a few years. That's how you have a good relationship because you're both clueless as hell to begin with. You don't know even what would make you happy, much less what would make the other person happy and so you've got to figure these things out bit by bit and you have to inform each other, and you have to be patient enough to let your partner do these things really badly. I'll give you another example. Sometimes I see couples sporadically in my clinical practice. I'm not a couples counsellor, but sometimes when I'm working with someone, there's an issue that needs to be discussed with both people because otherwise it's just stupid, and one of the things I often recommend to people especially once they have kids is that they set aside - to use an anachronistic phrase - date nights. Well, everyone hates that idea. They say, well you know, they'll just say, "I'm not doing that." That'd be one objection. "We're just not doing that. That's what we did before we got married." They'll say, "Well my partner will never go for that." They've got a bunch of excuses why that isn't going to work, and so I've heard all those excuses. I've heard all of them, and then maybe I convince them, "Yeah, yeah, I know this is stupid. It's awkward. It's artificial. That's okay. Just try it once." So then they'll go and try it, and then they'll come back and say, "We had an absolutely miserable time. Really. We had a miserable time. We couldn't agree on what movie to go to, and then she took me to her movie and I really didn't like it and so we fought all the way home. We're never doing that again." And I say, well really, you've got thirty years, four hundred days. That's twelve thousand days. Okay, so you're not going to do that. You're going to spend the next twelve thousand days without having any real romantic evenings and interactions with your spouse. That's your plan. And I like doing arithmetic with my clients. They hate that. They hate arithmetic. It's like well no that sounds like a bad idea. Okay well would you like some romance in your life or are you just done with that? Well really, like people can go for a long time with no romance at all. They say, "Well no maybe, we'd like some of that." Well how much? Once a year. Well, no. Once a month. Well, no. Once every two weeks. Well, sometimes people are really busy. Okay, that beats the hell out of zero. Once a week, twice a week. Okay, whatever, we're gonna start with a range. Okay, what would a good evening look like? Like if you could both get exactly what you wanted, what would it look like? Then they have to think about that because the previous theory was, "My stupid partner should know what I like" and that's what the partner is thinking too. It's like good luck with that, no they don't have a clue especially if they're men. They don't have a clue so you have to tell them what you want and how they could deliver it, and vice versa which is very awkward and horrible. And then you have to practice it for six months because you know, it takes a lot of practice to do something sophisticated really well, and then if you do that it's like poof, you got it for the rest of your life. So it's worth the aggravation, and you know the first time the rat puts its paw on the ladder, its just sort of doing it accidentally. You can't expect it to do it well, and that's exactly how to view your own progress and the progress of your partner. It's like let them do it badly for awhile. At least they're doing it. So if you think they should do it faster, well look real hard and see how easy it is to change your own behavior because it's really hard to change your own behavior. Everybody says, "I'm going to exercise three times a week." New Years, and its like no one does. They buy the membership and then they feel guilty for having them, but they don't actually go to the gym - and that's a perfect example of how difficult it is to transform behavior. Okay, so back to the diagram here. Expectation. So, the early models of expectation were cognitive models and the idea was the rat makes a little model of the world, and then he operates in that world according to what he expects. Now there's a problem with that model. There's a bunch of them. The first is now we know that animals don't make comprehensive models of the world, and that's a huge problem. The problem is, well what do they get rid of, and how? But the way you get rid of that problem is that you introduce motivation into the equation, and it's interesting because the behaviorists always thought of animals like blank slates so they never really took motivation seriously as a contributor to cognitive modeling. It's also the case that probably ever since the Enlightenment, people have thought of emotion and motivation as forces opposed to rationality. So you know, you're as rational insofar as you didn't let your emotions and motivations influence you. But that's a foolish theory. There are times when it's inappropriate for certain purposes to let certain motivations interfere with your observations, but generally speaking you never think about anything without being motivated because why would you? Like, there's a trillion things you can think of and you're not gonna think of most of them. You have to have a reason to think of them, and the reason is that, well, all the time you're operating in some sort of motivational structure, and you can sort of model them using the same kind of hierarchy that we use to model the personality as such. I'll give you an example. So let's think of some basic motivations and emotions. Those aren't good categories by the way because there's no such things as motivations and there's no such thing as emotions. The things we loosely categorize into motivations and emotions each have their own brain circuitry, and so there are similarities between them and there are differences. They're not clean categories. Well, we're gonna use the terminology anyways because we don't have a better one. For my purposes, you can roughly define a motivation as opposed to an emotion as a motivation is really something that establishes, you could say, a goal, but it doesn't. It establishes one of these. It doesn't establish a goal, and it doesn't drive behavior. So what it does is let's say you're hungry and it's nighttime, and you want to have a peanut butter sandwich. So imagine you're sitting there typing away, and all of a sudden this little image of having something to eat creeps into your head. It's not usually quite specific. It's that there's something you would like to eat. So you think, "Ah, I could really use some popcorn." So you're typing away and the stupid popcorn thing keeps popping up, and finally your whole body is starting to get into the popcorn and you think "Oh to hell with it, I'll go make some popcorn." So what's happened is that your hypothalamus, roughly speaking, is monitoring your internal body state and it thinks that you need some - maybe you need some salt, but maybe you need some food, and so it's gonna start popping up, not a drive. It's not like all of a sudden you're a robot, like a popcorn seeking robot and you're laying out your chained together condition popcorn making and eating routines. That isn't what happens. What happens instead that you start to envision a new state of being, and that state of being has a goal which is you eating some popcorn, and it has you where you are which is in an insufficient state of popcorn and then what's happening as well is that the motor processes that you would use to implement that are also disinhibited. They're there. You already know how to do it. They get disinhibited or you can think of them as getting primed. They're not. They're getting disinhibited, but you can think of them as getting primed. And at some point, that becomes overwhelming enough - say, pressure from the hypothalamus which is really what's bloody well in control. It says yeah, yeah, enough internet surfing. Off to the popcorn, and so you leap up and then what do you do? You reorient the way you're looking at the world. Everything in the world becomes low resolution, or even zero except those few things that are relevant to your new quest. Down the stairs you go. You find the right pan; you find the popcorn, getting irritated if you can't find it, right, because - now you see it's interesting because your emotions align along your goals. As long as you're pursuing a beeline to your goal, and everything's laying itself out not as you'd expect, but as you want, then your emotions stay positive but as soon as something deviates then you're irritated, and the reason for that is like let's say you can't find a popcorn pan. Well your brain is computing, well something like this. This is obviously not how it works, but it's an - x amount of energy and matter from popcorn means it has x value. If you expend a whole bunch of energy running around in your clueless state trying to acquire popcorn, you can easily get to the point where you've expended more energy and time than the popcorn delivers. And if you do that for a month, then you die. So it's perfectly reasonable for you to get irritated when the path length to your destination increases radically, and you might get even more irritated if you can't find any popcorn, and it's like oh no I have to dispense with the popcorn micro personality and it's all irritated because it's sort of alive. It's irritated you have to squash it, and then you have to come up with well maybe I can have a peanut butter sandwich. And then pop, up comes a new micro personality that orients itself towards the goal, and so all the time you're doing that, you're always in a motivated state. Now, it's not a drive because it's not deterministic, but it does have a behavioral element. You have all these Piagetian subroutines. They're stored in your body, you know, all your body capacity or your skills. And you know which set of those you're likely to use if you're going to do x thing. So those get prepared, and then your perceptions reorient towards the new goal. It's like a hunting goal. You're fixated on it, and then your emotions orient along that so as long as things are going well, you're happy. You're hopeful. Things are proceeding. That's positive emotion; that's dopaminergically mediated, and if things aren't going well it's either, well, it's any amount of negative emotion from mild irritation to full blown temper tantrum. So that's - and you're - okay that's the simple story. The complex story is okay, you're hungry, you're thirsty, you're tired, you're hot, you're lonely. You need to play. Okay, so let's say you've got, for the sake of argument, let's say you have eight fundamental motivational systems. Now, who cares how many. It's a finite set. It's under twenty. Depends on whether you include anger. Is anger motivation or emotion? Is pain motivation or emotion? We don't care because they're not formal categories. So anyways, there's a set number of them and then so they have to run to satiation. So what satiation means is they set up an end state; you perform the routines, you achieve the end state, and the system shuts down. It's satiated. Now you'll experience that as satisfaction, not as pleasure. And you'll think well what's the difference? It's tight. It's complicated, but it's important. The kind of positive emotion that people really like is associated with search and the hope, not with the acquiry because what happens when you acquire is well you're no longer in this state which has an impulse to action in it, but that's exciting. That's fun. You're on the track of something. It's like you're alive while you're searching for something. Well then you find it. It's like good, you need to find it, but then the whole thing disappears and you're sitting there thinking well I've just graduated. Now what? Right, because that's what'll happen when you graduate. It's like hey you're a student. You've got status. You've got a hierarchy of values. You've got a way of orienting yourself in the world, and you have an identity. So you're in there, and everyone's happy about it and so one day you graduate. It's like success. Well really, it's like poof that's gone, and the next thing you know, you're like handing out coffee at the local Starbucks. Yeah, well you get the point. You've experienced this all the time in your life. You hit a pinnacle. You've obtained something, but the problem is that now what? You have to conjure up a whole new you. So some of it is satisfying, you've accomplished a goal, but some of it's just a big pain in the neck. It's like uh oh, student me has disappeared and now it's frantically searching for employment me, and that me doesn't have the status, and is in a space of much more radical uncertainty. So don't be thinking that getting to where you want to go is what you want. What you want is to bloody well make sure that the voyage is worth it. Now it's very interesting because people are really wired up this way, and I think it's because we're so radically exploratory. So, when you're proceeding towards a valued goal, let's call that a cue that goal attainment is about to occur. It's going to occur in some chain. A leads to B, B leads to C, C leads to D, and so on. You're like a hound on a trail. It's positive, like yeah this is working. Yeah, this is working. Yeah, this is working. That's positive. It's moving you ahead, and that's really where you experience a lot of your positive emotion. That's dopaminergically mediated. That's the system you kick with cocaine or any of the other drugs of abuse that people use that don't quell anxiety. It's a very, very desirable motivational state. I read awhile back somebody who said you can buy anything but you can't buy wanting anything, and that's a staggeringly interesting comment because you think well, is wanting a positive state? Well you don't have it, so that's kind of annoying and you think, "No I don't want to want things. I want to have them." It's like yeah, don't be so sure about that. So one of the things, one of the ways people have figured out how to deal with that is they decide they want something that they can't get and that's actually extraordinarily smart, and it's a deep archetypal idea. Here's an example. You've seen Pinocchio, right? Okay, so Pinocchio is about a puppet, a marionette. So that means someone else is pulling his strings. Right? We don't know who. Sometimes it's virtually Satan himself. Remember the Stromboli? There's another character just after him is the coachman. The coachman, he's like king of the thieves and he ends up pulling Pinocchio's strings. So there's one scene in the Disney movie where the coachman reveals himself and he's completely red, he has really big teeth; he's a satanic figure, and he scares the fox and the cat who are like low level criminals who think they're bad, but you know, have never really met bad. He just scares them right into the corner, and so it's all of a sudden this person reveals the archetype behind and just closes back down pulling Pinocchio's strings. Okay, now. He's a marionette. Well, the first question that arises is who's pulling your strings? And that's a really good question. One of the things Jung said was "People don't have ideas, ideas have people." You know, you can think about that for about three months and it should make you afraid the whole time because as soon as you get that, you think uh oh. Let's say you're an ideologue of some sort because some of you probably are: socialist, fascist, environmentalist, something that has -ist on the end. It's like you think those are your ideas. They're not. You're their tools and that's fine. If you want to be a tool of those ideas, you go right ahead, but you don't know where those ideas are leading and they could well be leading somewhere you do not want to go. Now the plus side is you don't have to take responsibility for it because you're just drifting in an ocean of thought. But one of the things that I learned from Jung was you should figure out just exactly which ideas are possessing you and then you should decide if those are your ideas, and the probability that they are is zero. They're not your ideas. It's hard to have your own ideas. You have to derive them from your own experience, and especially when you're not very old, you don't have that much experience and so you can grab books full of ideas and claim them for your own which is not acceptable. You can use those ideas to inform your ideas, but they're not your ideas. You're just a puppet, and you know the Pinocchio movie is very interesting that way because he's a puppet of forces that are really not on his side. Seriously not on his side. Okay anyways, back to the Pinocchio movie. Give me one second. So Geppetto doesn't have a son. Now, Geppetto's a good guy right? He's a toymaker. He's got this little warm cabin. It's cozy. He's a good guy. He's friendly. He has a little cat. He pays attention to his little fish, he takes care of that. So we know Geppetto's a good guy and he makes this puppet and he thinks, "Man I've got a puppet but maybe I'd rather have something real. That's a good question for parents. You want a puppet, or do you want something real? And the answer is, generally often, I'll just have a puppet as long as it does exactly what it - maybe it'll be a medical school puppet because that's certainly one good form of puppet. Okay, so Geppetto decides cause he's a good guy, he thinks no no I don't want this thing to have strings. I want it to be its own thing. I want it to be autonomous, individual, real. Okay, so what does he do? He wishes. Right? What's he wish on? A star. Why do people wish on stars? Of all the crazy things. Well it's a divine thing. It's like there's heaven, it's all - it's at the infinite. You go out at night and you see the stars, which you can't in the city but you go out somewhere dark and you see the stars, and it's like you and the infinite. And it really is. It's a perfect representation of your relationship with the infinite because the universe is about as infinite as you need, and it's going to give you a sense of awe and that's partly why archaic people partly thought God was in the sky. It's like, they weren't stupid, these people. They thought God is what fills you with awe, so you look at the sky and think wow, that's something. It's an instinct. It's not a cognitive construction. So anyways, you aim at a star, and it's this twinkling thing in the darkness, right. It's the light in the darkness and it's above the worldly environment. It's something transcendent. So that's what Geppetto wishes on. It's like, I'm gonna aim high. That's what he says. Aim high. And he thinks well it's not very likely but I might as well aim high. That's a very good piece of advice. You want to aim so high you can't attain it because then you've got something worth - you might think that's such perverse. That's such a perverse piece of advice. Why would you chase something you can't have? Well the answer might be cause the chasing is worth it, and then you might think well what's worth it? Well I can give you a hint about that too. It's like develop your character because what you've got is what you carry with you wherever you go, and it's way better to be able to do things than to be rich cause if you're rich, well then that disappears. Poof, you're poor. But if you can do things short of being demolished, and even then people are unbelievable at overcoming those things. It's like you're on the way. Here's an interesting experiment we did with undergraduate women. So, there's this idea in evolutionary psychology. It's called hypergamy, and hypergamy is the tendency of women to choose mates who are slightly older than them, it's about four years on average cross culturally, and who are higher in the status hierarchy than they are. It's a very well documented tendency, and people who are cynical about that think women want wealth, and I thought well it's not a bad theory because it kind of evens the scales. It's like you're gonna have a family. You're basically - a chimpanzee baby clings to its mother's fur for five thousand miles in the three or four years its doing its clinging. It's like its a major league impediment, and you know, if you're a new mother, your life is so much more complicated than it is when you were single that it's not even the same conceptual universe. It's a major league responsibility, and it slows you down. So you might think the logical thing to do is to balance the scales a little bit and that's perfectly reasonable, but I thought, "Nah, I bet you women are smarter than that." I bet you can fool them, and the pick up artists do that all the time because they mimic status. So, you can fool them but they're smart. So what we did - I never published this for a bunch of reasons, but. Okay so what we did was we took pictures of the same guy - you know kind of an average looking guy. He's alright, and we had four stories about him, and one story was a poor useless guy. That's an easy story right. You know, sits on his couch, plays video games, eats Cheetos, covered with dust.
So I want to talk about some more attributes of this structure. Okay, now, broadly speaking what we're going to say is that a motivation sets up one of these frameworks. I'm going to call this framework a story. Now there's lots of things you could call it. You could call it an expectancy model, you could call it a game; I'm going to call it a story and we're going to say well what you do is you have a life story and your life story is composed of nested sub-stories. You could also think of it as a personality, but a story is like a personality in action. So, we'll just stick with story. The story has a starting place, that's where you are, and the story has an endpoint, that's where you're going. And you're always in one of those stories, or you're asleep. So, you're either pursuing something in the real world that is of value, that's directly motivated, or you're pursuing another situation where the reason you're pursing it is because it fulfills a bunch of motivational states now and into the future. So that 's what you're doing when you pursue, say a career. And, if you're not doing that, then your mind is wandering and what it's doing is it's wandering through the space of hypothetical worlds where you can play hypothetical roles. And if you're not doing that then you're asleep. So you're in one of these all the time. Now they shift, and that's one of the things that's quite interesting about them. The shift can take place on all sorts of levels. You can differently conceptualize the way, where you are. You can differently conceptualize where you're going, and you can differently conceptualize how you're going to get there. Now, I won't go into that for the moment. So let's say you're going from point A to point B. At the highest level of resolution that means that you're acting. And then other things that happen is not only are you acting, you're configuring your perceptions. We already talked a little bit about this. You know what you should highlight, what you should bring your high resolution thinking to bear on, and you know what you should ignore. And what you should ignore is those things that are likely to remain constant as you pursue the set of transformations, or that aren't going to interfere with what you're doing. And so you just have to concentrate, especially if you set your environment up properly, and that's another thing. Part of the way that people deal with the complexity of the world is by just not having it around. You know so for example, even if you look in this room, a lot of things are radically simplified so that you don't get overwhelmed. "How many of you have computers here? Okay, now what does your computer look like? Keyboard? Screen? What about the rest of it? Flat? Shiny? Aluminum? Why?" Because you want to act like that's one thing. You don't want to act like it's - "how many transistors are on a chip now? Like a billion or more?" A lot, and they're down to molecular size those things. They're so small now, this is really funny, they're so small now that - so imagine electrons running along a wire. Now the weird thing about an electron is it might be there and it might be somewhere else. So it's got this vague, non-locality about it. You know like maybe it's supposed to be there but it's actually over there; and would happen now and then. But the wires are so damn thin now that there's some good probability that the electron will be outside the wire, and that causes short-circuits. So, that's quite, well you've got quantum level complexity mucking up your circuitry in your computer. But look, the computer is designed this way, right? It's designed so you can ignore it. The outside of it is a flat shell. It's a low-resolution image. And, not the keyboard because you have to move it, not the screen and everything else is flat. The designer, the primate designer of this computer does not want your poor primate brain to be overwhelmed by the fact that this thing is incomprehensibly complex. Cars are the same they have that nice shiny shell on them and so that you can just sort of low resolution it and that's good enough. The walls painted roughly the same color, we're doing a lot things around us to reduce the sensory lobe. Plus, there are people beadling away in the background like mad making sure the lights stay on and making sure the heat stays on, you know making sure you have air in here. The place isn't burning down, there aren't crazy people wandering around in here with shotguns and rifles. There's a lot going on so that you can sit here and pretend that you know enough to stay alive. So, we're also removing a tremendous amount of complexity as a consequence of social cooperation. Okay, so these are all parts of the way that you simplify the world. You're in a radical simplification structure that's the external society. Then within that there's only certain things you want, and then within that there's only certain things you can detect, and then within that there's only certain features that pop out as necessary to contemplate in the realm that you're dealing with. Now, one thing you might ask is well, "what time span are you usually dealing with?" You know cause what the world's made of depends on the time span; and that's a tough one. We know that it's more than 1/10th of a second. But you can think years into the future, right? So I might say well, "why are you going to university?" Or I might say, "what are you doing right now?" And then the answer would be, well I'm sitting in class. And then the question would be, "well why are you sitting in class?" And the answer to that would be well because I want to take this course. "And why?" Well it's because I want to get my degree. "Why?" Well, because I want to be prepared for a career and, you know, a productive and high quality life when I get out. Well, "why?" Well you know you can keep saying why, pretty much indefinitely and as you answer you go farther and farther out in time scales. Now, it's a tricky thing because one of the things I might tell you, and this is a very complex cognitive problems is, "well where should you stop?" So for example, I could say, "do you want 100 dollars now or do you want 50 000 years in 75 years?" You're going to think, "well I'll probably take the 100 dollars now." "Well how about in 200 years?" It's like, well I'm not going to be there I'll take the 100 bucks now. So obviously thinking out 200 years is not that helpful. Now you might think well no, you should calculate the effects of your actions on the vastest time span possible and include the largest number of people, if you're really going to equilibrate it. But the problem is you can't do the computations. Because you get, you get this called combinatorial explosion happening, which is that, it's like a chessboard. You make one move, okay fine. But then you could make four and with each of those you could make four more and then with each of those you could make four more and soon if you're looking twenty moves ahead, it's like there's so many moves that the other person could possibly make, that looking that far ahead is pointless. You can't do the computations. And so, we don't know how far you should look into the future, it depends on how stable your environment is. But, one month seems okay, a year, yeah, three to five years, that's what Ill have you do when I have you do the future-authoring program. "Twenty years?" Hmm, probably not. And the reason for that is the margin of error in your prediction grows so large that your prediction isn't worth anything, and you can really see how that's the case now, cause like, "what's it going to be like in twenty years?" When I was a kid I used to read science fiction. It was like, plausible accounts of the potential future. It's like, now, who knows? Anything could happen. Anything could happen. You know you could be three quarters robot in twenty years. You could have a lifespan of ten thousand years. I mean, we just do not know. We could be living in caves again with everything in ruins. We don't have a clue what's going to happen. So twenty-year span, I would say, get friendly with computers. So twenty-year span is too long. So, okay, anyways what I 'm pointing out is that you have to calculate, you have to calculate what you're doing in across multiple spans of time, and in the combination, and in combination with many many people. And that makes things very complex. But that's how you're building the structures that you live within. Alright, so back to this. You're at point A you're going to point B. So, you are somewhere. Now, that's interesting. You are somewhere. Now generally what people think about when they think about being somewhere is that they're in a place. But you're not just in a place. You're in a place at a time. And I really want to stress that because we know that the universe, we know that the environment is four-dimensional, not three-dimensional. That's important because you could be in the same place, and in the next second you're still where you were but you're in a completely different place. So for example, if someone walked in here with a pistol, this would not be the same place. Okay, so there's a reason I'm telling you that. And then, there's the future, and that's also a place in time and a place in space. Okay, now you're getting from point to the other, and you're going to do that by implementing certain behaviors. Now you might say, what can happen while your doing that? Well here's three things that can happen. The thing you want, that can happen. Something you don't want, but that you understand, and something you don't understand at all, something completely beyond your comprehension. And that would generally be a traumatizing event of some sort. So, you can either know what's going to happen. Or you cannot know and still be able to cope with it, or you can not know and not cope with it. Of the negative ones they correspond to that hierarchy, right? If it's a little thing that you don't understand you just modify a little behavior. If it's a big thing that you don't understand, well then what? Well then everything falls apart. Don't know where you are, don't know where you're going, and all the behaviors you have are not helpful. And that's when your world falls apart. So, generally that doesn't happen. So, let's say I set my target on the door. I'm going to walk to the door. So here's what happens. Instantly, I'm slightly, I have slight negative emotion about the fact that any of blank issue in the way people exist. Because what my brain is doing is reconfiguring the world, to chart a straight path and anything that's in the way is going to make me uneasy- frustrated, disappointed, anxious. And you can think about this when you do house design, by the way. So, when you're setting up a room, what you want to do is figure out what the room is for. Then you want to clear the paths for that. Because then when you walk into the room, the room will say, "Welcome! You can do the things you want to do here, easily." And if you don't do that, it's all cluttered up. It's like, there's no difference between that and being confused mentally. It's exactly the same thing. So, okay, so let's say I now stand up and that works and then I walk that way, and that way and that way. I keep my eyes on the door, and I'm getting towards the door. Well I'm moderately positive about that, because I'm getting where I'm going, but I'm also moderately positive about it because the fact that I'm getting where I'm going validates my whole theory. So one of the things that the behaviorists didn't get right when they were thinking about punishment - If an animal lays out a behavior and you punish it, it'll stop manifesting that behavior. But that isn't all that happens. You think about punishing a human being. They stop manifesting the behavior, but the behavior isn't the whole damn thing. The thing you're in is this, it's the whole thing. It's the conception of where they are, it's the conception of where they're going, and it's all the behaviors they might need to get there. So, you know, maybe they'll try to circumvent the punishment, walk around it. Maybe they'll try a few more behaviors, but what happens, you know, so I'm tied by a chain and I don't know it, I'm tied by a chain to the wall. I start walking that way and I figure out that I'm chained. Well, so much for that stupid theory, I'm not getting to the door. I'm going to let that view of the world disintegrate, I'm going to be very upset about that, and then I have to come up with another one, which might be, "well how do I get rid of the chain?" So when you fail, two things happen. The behavior that you're manifesting doesn't work, that's the behaviorist routine. But it's worse than that because the whole little personality that you're using to construe the world falls apart. And the more important the thing is that has fallen apart, the more of a catastrophe it's going to be for you. So let's say you're going to medical school, that's what you want to do. Alright, so, you're taking the course to write the exam to pass the course with an A to apply to medical school to get into medical school to be a doctor. You fail the test, "what just happened?" " Well, did your whole future fall apart?" "Or did you just fail the test?" Who knows, right? Maybe you're whole future just fell apart, it's like, now you have a GPA of 3.3, like No, you have to go to the Caribbean to a private medical school. You're not going to get in anywhere in Canada or the United States, it's like, okay, "is your life over?" "Do you jump off a bridge?" Well sometimes people do. And it's because the little sub-personality that they created which is the "me that will be a doctor", it's one of these things the little story, it's so integral to their entire identity, that when it collapses they're done. And people get suicidal when that sort of thing happens. Okay, so well, "what are you supposed to do when that happens?" Well, that's something that we'll talk about. You know, from the perspective of mental hygiene, one of the things I would recommend is that when things go wrong for you, you start at the highest level of resolution in your hierarchy and work upward. You don't say, "well God, now everything's over!" You know, you might say, "okay, what can I do to ensure that I do better on the next test?" So, then you could analyze your subroutines, your micro-subroutines, like how much do you study a day? Well, sometimes people will tell me "I study six hours a day." It's like, no you don't. You sit in front of what you're supposed to be doing for six hours a day, but if you actually study for more than three I would be shocked. Cause I've met almost no one in my entire life, who can sustain high-level concentration for more than 3 hours, for more than 6 days a week for more than a year. You'll just burn yourself to a crisp. So no, you're deluding to yourself into thinking that you're studying six hours a day. You'd be way better off to cut it down to two and a half and actually do it. There's micro-routine analysis that you can do. So that might be helpful, then you can implement that and run it, that's what you'd do if you're a behavioral psychologist. Someone comes and says, "my life's over" and you say, "well let's go through the micro-routines." Well, they say, "well what do you mean? Well they say, "I can't be a doctor." Well, okay. "Could you be a nurse? Would that work? Could you be a medical technician?" You know, could you be a social worker? Etc, like okay so your domain is helpful medical type of person. Well one element of that is doctor, but it doesn't exhaust the entire realm of possibilities. So I'd say flex up a bit! You know, it's not the only path. And so that would be a more high-level adjustment, that'd be a more cognitive adjustment. If you're in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, it's like, let's check out your subroutines, make you more effective at studying, but you know, let's loosen up your top-level abstractions. You should be a good person, let's say. Whatever you decide that means. One element of that is, be productively employed in a way that doesn't make you bitter and nasty. Okay, doctor might be one way of solving that, although I wouldn't be so sure of that. But it's not the only way of solving it. So, alright, you go from point A to B. You go from point A to point B, and things can happen along the way. Things you like - positive emotion, you're getting there, plus you're right. Things that produce negative emotion - you're not getting there, okay. You can either solve them easily, with small behavioral adjustment, or you have to go up the hierarchy of value and adjust it with the least possible damage, generally speaking- because that's another rule of thumb in therapy. I can't be a doctor so I'm going to be an engineer. Well, no. You've got three years behind you, don't just throw it away, use what you've got and make a minor course deviation, if you can do it. And you know we can talk about broader scale transformations, but they're costly. But you know stick as close to the path as you can, while altering it enough so that you can proceed to your final goal. And so, well I think this is where we'll stop today, that leads us to the next part of the story. So, here's the kind of story that someone can tell. I was at point A and I went to point B and here's how I did it. And you're pretty happy about that story. Maybe you go on Youtube and, I found this a year ago, I had this old car wanted to put a stereo in it and so I typed in, "how to put a stereo in an x old car" and there's a helpful retired southern guy who, you know, made a Youtube video out of it. I was interested in his little story, and he didn't have a car stereo in his car and he wanted one, I didn't have a car stereo in my car and I wanted one. So his little story about how to do that was very interesting to me. So I ran the little tape and I did it. Great, not particularly transformational, but good enough. I got some information. Alright, so that's an alright story and you're running around all of the time interfacing with other people and you're telling them you're little story and they're telling you their little story. But you know so that's one thing that interests people - how to do something successfully. But a lot of what people talk about is something different. Which is, I was trying to get from point A to B and it didn't work and now I'm at a place where it didn't work. And so it's a problem, right? The world's opened up around me, I don't know what to do. And the reason you talk to people about that, is because they have brains. And so do you. And you might as well have two brains working if you can and if you're reciprocal, you know, you're in trouble you come to me, and we talk it out, and maybe I can help. And then because we're playing a interitive game, now you owe me a favor. Now, you know, I'm not going to be too restrictive about that, but you know, socially intelligent people are reciprocal. Ben Franklin once said, you're new in a neighborhood what should you do to get integrated? He said, ask a neighbor for a favor. A small favor - don't ask will you build me a new house? It's like, no that's not going to work. But, "my dog's on the front lawn would you watch him for 2 minutes while I run to the corner store?" It's like, okay they can do that. Well why would you do that? Well it opens up the possibility of a reciprocal exchange. It's very very smart, cause now they can ask you for a favor. So you get the trade thing going. People who are highly social are really good at identifying and maintaining reciprocal obligations. So, we use each other as problem solving resources. And a lot of our communication is exactly that. And so basically the story you're telling isn't I was at point A and I went to point B and everything worked. The story is this instead. It's half of this. I was at point A (that's the top left hand corner), I was at point A and I was going to point B but something didn't work. And then things collapsed, you know, to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the severity of the event, and the closeness of your friendships that you're telling the story, you're not going to tell catastrophic stories to someone on a bus that you just sat down beside, unless you have a mental illness. Well, really it's the truth. Sometimes you sit down on a bus, and someone who has a mental illness will come and sit beside you and they will immediately tell you horrible things about their life. And the reason for that is, they have to. They don't have anyone to talk to, they can't sort out their brains. They're so desperate, they're so ruined, they're in chaos. They're so ruined, that the proclivity to proclaim the chaos absolutely overwhelms them. And you just can't deal with someone like that most of the time because the magnitude of the problem they're facing you with is way beyond your capacity to solve, so it's just awkward. It's not good. Anyways, you say, I was going from point A to point B, didn't work! Now I don't know where I am, I don't know where I'm going and I'm lost. And you say, "in my experience when I was in a situation like this, I did this, I did this and I know someone else in that situation who did this maybe you could try those." Or maybe you just shut up, and you let the person talk! And that's often extremely useful. And the reason you do that is because they're thinking. Because people think they think, but they don't. they talk. Thinking is hard. Right, it's a very complex abstract, cognitive operation. And I don't think that they're many more people who can think, than there are people who can really read. And that's probably 2-5% of the population at most. And so most of the way that people deal with that is that they talk. And that's their thinking, and so they have some ideas about what might be going on, but they're mixed and muddy, so they're basically throwing out these ideas, "did this happen? Is he like this? Is she like that? Did I do this?" And then they watch you, and if you're nodding about one then they think, oh well, you know, that seems plausible, and they you lay out another, and they don't even notice and then you think well that's off the table, I didn't think that was a very good idea, but now I've got some social validation, and soon they talk it out, and instead of having sixty vaguely defined problems, now they have five very tightly defined problems. They're feeling a lot better about that, right, because it's five snakes instead of sixty. And maybe they can deal with five snakes. So you've already helped them a whole bunch just by listening. You know, and then maybe you can be an active listener, they lay out their story and you say, well you said something here that doesn't make any sense with this thing that you said. So you know, how would you reconcile those? You know, it's this dialectical process and so the person collapses into chaos, and they come and tell you about it and you rescue them if you can out of the chaos and then they pop back up the other side. Clinical practice is actually a formalized version of an ideal relationship. So you think, "what's an ideal relationship?" Well, I would say that an ideal relationship is where both of you are trying to get better than you are and you're helping each other do it. It's something like that. You know if I have a good relationship with you I would rather that you're the best you, you can be. And I would assume that you would also like that for me. I mean things interfere with that because you might say, well if given how horrible I am, if my partner all of a sudden got a clue, they'd leave, so I'd better interfere with that as much as I possibly can. People do that all the time. You know one of the things they'll do is make sure their partner isn't too attractive. It's like, if you're so attractive, why are you with someone like me? It's like, I'll criticize you when you look attractive and that'll fix that. So, and people do that sort of thing all the time. This is the revolutionary story. This is the real story people tell. I was here and I got bloody-well knocked off my perch and then for a while things were not good. And then you know I reconfigured myself, I learned some things, I did some exploration, I made some changes, and poof! Off the other side I come. And I'm a better person for it. And if you listen to the way people talk about their pasts, especially with regards to traumatic events, they'll often tell you that. They'll say, well you know in retrospect that was the best thing that ever happened to me. It's like, those are the people who come out the other side I'll tell you. Lots of people, they fall into the belly of the beast and they never come out. You see that fairy tales some times. So there will be a hero, and he'll conquer some sort of dragon or some sort of monster and when he cuts it open and a bunch of people come out. It's like, yeah! They're the ones that got swallowed by the thing. And it isn't until that person comes along that solves the problem that all those other people get to come out. So, that's a revolutionary story. It's the archetypal revolutionary story. And it's the story of human progress. Socially, politically, economically, psychologically. And you see that reflected, for example, one of the things I could tell you about Christianity is that it's a revolutionary narrative. At the beginning, so if you look at the Bible, structured like a piece of literature, at the beginning there's a fall, everyone was doing fine and then they wake up and they find out that the bottom is dropped out. And then the whole rest of this book is about, okay, how do you get back up? Actually it is in this, I'll tell you, partly what the Bible is, is the attempt by, broadly speaking Western civilization, so that would be all the way from the Middle East, to the west - it's the West's attempt to figure out what's wrong with life and how to fix it. And it's the collaboration of thousands of people over thousands of years, of course you can say that about any ancient moral tradition. So, the question is, "well is there an answer to that question?" Well that's one of the next things we're going to try to figure out. Well let's say you're driving down the 401. Your car breaks down. You're off by the side of the road, maybe it's snowing, it's like "how bad is that?" Well you don't know. Maybe someone slides on the snow and runs over you, you're dead, it's really bad. So you're freaking out, maybe your phone isn't working so you check your phone, that's not working, it's like all of a sudden things have gotten worse. So this person drives up behind you and they stop. You're a bit nervous about them because what are they up to? And they come up, they open the hood and they say, "well this thing's loose." And they put it in there. It's like, are you happy? Well, yes, because what's happened to you is magic. First of all you're not in a car, soon as it stops working by the way. It's only a car when it's working. When it's not working it's a bag of snakes, right? It's like, uh oh, this car isn't working. "What could be wrong with it?" OH! It's an infinite number of things, none of which I understand! And those things are all attached to people who are going to fix the car. "Can I trust them? Do I even know who they are? Are they going to empty my wallet? Do I need to have a new car?" So you don't know, and then well your day is gone. So all of a sudden, what happens is you're environment complexifies radically. And you get all nervous because there's a lot of paths in there that you might have to traverse to get back to where you're going. Someone comes along and goes, tap! It's like you're happy, and all the complexities collapsed. In one path it went poof, your story is now implementable again. And you'll pay people for that. You do it all the time. It's like, you got a problem, you take it to an expert. They say, it'll take you an infinite amount of time to traverse all these possible paths so you're basically screwed, but if you give me a hundred dollars I can tell you how to do it in five minutes. You think, "yes! That's worth it!" So of course it's efficient, that's why we trade. It's exactly why we trade. Things are going to go wrong with you that I could help, and vice versa, what a deal! That's partly why we're social and why we maintain it. Like as a collective, we're way more intelligent than we would be if we were one person. So, alright, that's a revolutionary story. That's a collapse into the underworld, and a rebirth. And so as soon as you know that it's so cool to know that because now, whenever you read a classic story of any sort you can think oh that's a voyage to the underworld! I've been there, and you have! everyone's been there, the underworld is where that's chaos it's chaos, it's where you go when your life falls apart. It has a structure. And what's even cooler about that is, once you know this, there's actually guides through it. It's like, okay, your world fell apart. "What do you do about it?" Dying of stress is a bad idea. You don't have to do that. So I was talking to one of the students during the break. We were talking about character, and I said, well, the best thing you can do is build your character. Here's a test of character. A family member is dying, okay, are you useful or useless? That's the first question. And then a deeper question is, do you make it as good as it can be? Which isn't going to be that good by the way, or do you turn it into hell? Because you can, and lots of people do. So one of the tests of character is - okay, there's a crisis. Like really! "How are you going to respond? Are you going to be helpful? Or are you going to be useless?" Or ever worse, are you going to make it worse? I would say, helpful, and the thing that's so cool about human beings is that we can do that. People are so tough it's insane; as long as they put themselves in the position. My sister-in-law works as a palliative care nurse. It's like all she does is work with people who are going to die in two weeks. She's a happy person, partly because she goes home and thinks, hey this isn't a palliative care ward! Well really man! Things can be worse. And she knows that and she's reminded of it every day. That's a person who does not take things for granted.
So I want to continue talking about this basic story or sub personality or game or map. So what I've discussed with you so far is that there are different ways that you can construe the objects and territories that you inhabit, and that modern people generally think that the world they inhabit is one that's defined by science, but I would say - I would say actually it depends on which scientist you mean because I don't believe that the worldview that emerges as a logical consequence of Darwinism is the same worldview that emerges as a logical consequence of Newtonian presuppositions and you know the reason I'm bringing Newton into it is because we still think in Newtonian terms and it's been more than a hundred years or about a hundred years I guess, since Newton's model was expanded by quantum physics, but no one thinks that way because you can't think that way and besides that, the reason you don't think that way is because at the level of resolution that you exist, things behave in a Newtonian manner so it's in accordance with some of our natural perceptions. Now, I started thinking this way for a variety of reasons but I was influenced later by a guy named Gibson - JJ Gibson, who wrote a book called "An Ecological Approach to Visual Perception." And he made the case, quite strongly, that what you directly perceive is the implication of situations and objects. So for example, I suppose you've all seen the famous visual cliff experiment with babies where if you put a piece of glass across an open space and the space is evidently deep, the baby won't cross the glass and so there's some evidence there for relatively innate, not only depth processing. It's not just depth processing, right, because in order to not crawl off that, you also have to perceive that - well Gibson would say that it's a falling off place, and he would say that's actually what you perceive is a falling off place and then maybe you can extract out the idea of cliff, but that isn't what you perceive and you know, the sense you have when a bear is chasing you that's dangerous, that doesn't seem to be merely psychological in a sense like it's not merely, in a sense, not - it's not less real than perceiving the bear as an object. An object that eats you is not the same object as an object that remains neutral to you or positive, and it seems quite clear, and this is where the Darwinian issue I think arises, that you have to evaluate with your perception because otherwise you're too slow. So anyways, I developed this diagram as a consequence of thinking about these things for a long time, and the diagram is predicated on the idea that when you begin to act in the world, you're inside a motivational frame, let's say, and that motivational frame can be instantiated or put into practice or put into place by any number of underlying motivational systems, some of them the more basic motivational systems that we share with animals going far back down the evolutionary chain and some of them more complex mixtures of emotional or motivational drives that been organized across lengthy periods of times in social circumstances. So for example, if you're at a bar and you're looking for someone, it's not really reasonable to say - we'll take the simple case. It's not really reasonable to say that your behavior is motivated by sex because that's what happens only if you're actually in a sexual act. Before that, the motivations are multiple and they have to be because otherwise you wouldn't have the sophistication to begin a conversation with anyone. So to think of that as driven in some sense by sexuality means either to consider a much more expanded notion of sexuality or to not consider it driven in that manner. Now, I think it's reasonable to make the presumption that you're motivated to move ahead and we know that for a variety of reasons. Partly that's because if you look at the brain at the level of the hypothalamus which is a very, very archaic and primordial subsystem in the brain, then it's roughly divided into two parts and one part is responsible for a lot of the things we consider basic motivations, and the other part is responsible for exploration. So the dopaminergic tracts whose operation underlies movement forward and incentive reward and what you generally experience as the sorts of positive emotion associated with hope, and excitement, and curiosity, that system is instantiated in the hypothalamus, and a lot of the hypothalamus is devoted to it. So, as a very primordial system whose operation appears to be a default. It's a default operation if none of the other motivational systems need current attention. Well the other default I suppose is sleep or rest and you can certainly see that in animals because, you know, if you have a cat you'll notice - of course they're nocturnal, but they'll sleep a large part of the day and so do dogs. So, you know, if you're not looking for a partner, if you don't want to play, if you're not hungry, not thirsty, and so on, not under the grip of any direct biological necessity let's say, then your default position is to rest or sleep or to explore, and the thing about the exploratory circuit is it's really old. It's as old as pain. It's as old as lust. It's as old as anger. It's as old as hunger. It's as old as thirst. Like it's a really, really old system. It's a very primordial system, and human beings are quite hyper exploratory, at least collectively as you can tell because we keep inventing new things and exchanging new modes of being. So, you can say in some sense that you have a drive to engage with the world and to expand your domain of knowledge. And the reason that you have that is because the human race has gambled on that as a sufficient means of ensuring adaptation into the future, you know, and it's a strange one because most animals are very, very conservative. In fact, most human societies are very, very conservative so it's certainly possible for even relatively modern human societies - so let's say those that have arisen in the last fifty thousand years - to remain relatively unchanged for periods during that time of up to ten thousand years. That seems to be what happened, for example, with regards to the original inhabitants of Australia and so it's statis that's the norm, not transformation, and you know, even societies that we feel were very dynamic like let's say Ancient Egypt still there are indications in the archaeological records of relatively unchanged customs and practices for periods that you would count in the thousands. So, most animals and many societies bet that just doing the same thing over and over is gonna do the trick, and human beings - well that isn't what we're like man. God only knows how that originally came about, you know. It was the conjunction of many, many processes and forces, and it would be very, very difficult to tell a complete causal story, but anyways here we are. Now, it's reasonable to think of us as motivated to move forward and motivated to explore, and so that's the fundamental motivation for engaging with the world apart from anything that's a strictly lower level biological. And while we're doing that, it's also customary for us to look at the world in terms of its utility, and I would say with human beings that it's a very tool based utility because you know, our brain is part of our body. Our brain is adapted to our body and our body is adapted to our brain. Obviously they coevolved and so the kind of brain we have is the sort of brain that a creature that stands upright and can manipulate the world has, and we'll see some evidence of that later. But ebcause we're so handy, we can speak with our hands and we can manipulate things with our hands and we can transform things with our hands and we can tear things apart and we can hunt and we can plant and there's an endless number of possibilities for hand utilization. The world appears to us arrayed out as tools, roughly speaking, and a tool would be something - it's hard to get the word exactly right because I like tool because tool implies something that you can use whereas Gibson would have talked about - what did he call it? I can't remember. It'll come to me in a minute. The word reflects the fact that the world is presenting itself to you as something you can use. Let me just look that up for a second. That's very annoying. Oh well, whatever. So naturally when you lay out the world, it lays itself out into things that are going to be useful for you, things that are going to get in your way, and then things that have neither property. Under most circumstances, the things that have neither property are the overwhelming majority, and that's partly how you manage to process the world in all of its complexity with your relatively narrow processing capacity. Most things have no significance, and they have no significance within this very very focal frame which is if you remember the hierarchy diagram, it's like in that hierarchy diagram, most of the time you're operating at the level of motor interaction with the world. You're actually engaged with the world either through articulation, but forget about that for now, or you're actually engaged moving in the world and moving it around and interacting with it. It's as if you're viewing the world through a series of concentric lenses and those concentric lenses exclude and then the highest resolution lens, the one that enables you to focus closest, is the one that helps you highlight those few things in the vast perceptual world of nothingness that seem to be critical for that particular operation. So now, you can see that. I mean the most dramatic example of that - I was really personally thrilled about Dan Simon's gorilla experiments because I'd been thinking about this for a long time before that experiment came out and it was the clearest demonstration I had seen. I mean, there's a lot of demonstrations like that now but it was the clearest demonstration I'd ever seen that indeed most of what you're perceptual systems do is exclude. Now what that means - this is the tricky thing is that what that means is that wrapped up in what you exclude is the entire - is all of being, virtually and that's a very tricky problem because when you're excluding all of being, in some sense you're setting its value to zero. You say, "Well except for those few things that I'm concentrating on now, everything else is zero and it's zero and unchanging." And the problem with that is that lots of times that's not right. Now it's right enough, luckily enough, and I suppose this is a consequence of evolution too. We're fast enough or slow enough, depending on how you look at it so that we can assume constancy across some span of time under some conditions. Now, from a philosophical perspective that's inadequate. Some of you might have heard of the phrase "The scandal of induction." Well, it's a pointer to a very profound philosophical problem and the philosophical problem is how do you know the same thing that happened before is going to happen next? And the answer to that is generally you don't know, and it's a very tricky issue to come to terms with you know. I think you can think of things as you know, if you think about a hierarchy of resolution again. I think you can think of things as very, rather predictably, in their unpredictability. So for example, there's some indication that protons decay. But they decay over such a long time frame that the probability that that's going to affect us is virtually zero, and there's other things that we interact with quite regularly like the sun that are stable across timeframes that make it virtually ignorable. Well I'll tell you a story about that, and this is a good story to indicate how everything is nested in what you ignore. So, part of this story is fictional, but part of it isn't. So, one time when I was in graduate school in Quebec, in Montreal, I was typing on my pre-hard drive computer and it stopped, and you know computers do that and so what happens when your computer stops? Well, the first thing that happens is it depends on what you're working on. That's the critical issue right? So what happens is that you have a reaction that's proportionate to the deemed importance of what it was that you're working on and there's going to be an association between that and deadlines, and there's going to be an association between that and amount written that you think you might have lost, and then. So there's, there's - because what you're doing is nested in a hierarchy, you know, I'm writing a sentence to write a paragraph to write a essay to hand the essay in to fulfill a requirement of class to graduate, etc. all the way up the nested hierarchy. You're going to be upset in proportion to the upset - or to the cost of this failure in terms of that entire structure. So you do a rough estimate eh, because you don't really know and generally you don't assume the worst although you might immediately because that's the sort of situation where someone will go - they'll get angry, or I will anyways. I'll pound my first on the - and then I'll curse Microsoft usually or whoever happened to make the computer, and then I'll remember I can usually fix computers if there's something wrong with them and that probably all it needs to do is to be rebooted and so forth. And so what happens to begin with is a burst of emotion and the reason for that is that the significance of the unexpected event cannot be easily constrained, and that's because there's so many things that might gone wrong. Now, you know, because the worst case scenario is maybe your computer is dead, and then that's a problem for all sorts of reasons we don't have to go into, and it's not just a technical problem right? It's also a political, and social, and economic problem, weirdly enough, because then when you go buy a computer you have to figure out, well who's the manufacturer and where's the manufacturing done, and what's a high quality computer, and it's like good luck figuring that out because they change every month so you just can't keep track of it. So it opens up a whole rat's nest, or hornet's nest of problems - or a pit of snakes which is a better way of thinking about it. Okay so, fine. So, my computer's dead so I try to reboot it. Doesn't reboot, and so I think I don't know, maybe it's burned out or maybe there's something wrong with the plug. So I plug a lamp into the same outlet and I try to turn on the lamp and the lamp doesn't go on, so then I think aha! I blew a fuse because this place had fuses so fine. So I go to the fuse box, and it's daytime so it's not a problem, and I look at the fuses and there's nothing wrong with the fuses and so I think well I'll go down to the corner store and get a cigarette because I smoked at that time, and I'll think about it on the way. So I go outside and all the street lights are off. So the whole city's come to a halt. I think, oh there's a power outage. It's like yeah there was a power outage, and here's what happened. A solar flare emerged from the sun, surfacing. It was a whopping big one, and a solar flare like that sends out a wind, essentially, of charged particles that come zooming towards the Earth and we're protected from them for a variety of reasons, including the fact that the Earth is magnetic and for complicated reasons, that helps protect us from cosmic rays which is really a good thing as far as I'm concerned. But now and then those things are so powerful that they'll - well here's an example. If you have a hydrogen bomb, a big one, and you detonate it in the middle of North America in the atmosphere, high up, you'll wipe out all the electronics in the entire continent permanently because what happens is that when the bomb goes off, there's an electromagnetic pulse and that produces an electric current that runs through the wiring, and that'll be of - very brief obviously but of sufficient intensity to fry the electronics. So, well that's what the sun is. The sun is a massive hydrogen bomb and so now and then it goes off with the force of, you know, millions of hydrogen bombs and then we get the pulse radiating towards us and then it sets a current in the power grid which what happened here and takes out the whole power grid. That's what happened at that point. The Quebec power grid was down for awhile, and it was because - so that's why my computer crashed is because the sun wasn't as stable as I thought it was. That gives you an example of just how interconnected things are and how much you're taking for granted when you make anything invisible. I would say that part of what happens in a civilized society - we'll say a civilized and productive society - is that there are rules of conduct in place and there are effective processes in place so that most of the time you can rely on things being like they were yesterday. So for example, our power supply is unbelievably reliable given that it's so intrinsically unstable. People have to beetle around nonstop just to keep the power on, but they do and so we can sit here and ignore it, and we can concentrate on something more arcane and much more focused but it's also because it's a relatively peaceful society and we have relatively peaceful free speech and so on and so forth, and you can predict with a high degree of certainty that if you come to class, then what's going to happen in the class - the worst that's going to happen in the class, likely, is that you're either going to get bored or hot. So that's not so bad you know. Alright so you're going from point A to point B, and you see your tools. I still haven't remembered that damn word. What the hell is that damn word? That's so annoying. Nope. Whatever. You go along and you see these tools. These are things that are going to help get you to your goal, and whenever you see those, you get a burst of positive emotion and basically that means two things, that positive emotion. Think about it as a little dopamine kick, and this is where this story differentiates a little bit from classic behaviorism. So the behaviorists would say you get a little dopamine kick and that increases the probability that the action that you just took will be taken again in the future, and so it's partly because the dopamine kick has a positive emotional - it provides a positive emotional experience but it's also because the dopamine facilitates neural growth, and so if you're beetling along and something good happens to you, then your brain makes the things you were doing - the circuits that underlie the things you were doing just before the good thing happened - a little bit stronger. But, the other thing that happens when you're beetling along and doing your positive thing is that you get a little dopamine - is that the fact that it's working also validates your frame of reference because you know you know might say well, if what you're doing is lurking and you're getting what you want, how is it that you're right? And the answer to that is well in some ways, you're right enough up the entire hierarchy and so what that means is that every time you proceed along the path that you've chosen and that's working, that entire structure gets stabilized a bit more, and that's how it should be. Now, I've tried to work out how exactly this happens and I can give you the best example by telling you about cocaine addicts. So, addicts use to have this phrase. "Monkey on my back." And that phrase referred to the compulsion, the compulsive sub personality that develops that's interested in nothing but more of the substance. Now, you know, you think about that as being hooked and you might think about it as a motivational drive or a biological drive, but the thing is it's not like that. We're just not that deterministic. An addicted person has grown an addicted sub personality. And I mean grown. It's not psychological. It's psychophysiological. So imagine this. Imagine this is how it works. I'll first tell you what happens to cocaine addicts if you take them out into a treatment center. Heroin addicts is the same thing, roughly speaking. So you take this person who's dependant out to a treatment center, and with heroin, say, you have to let them go through withdrawal. And that takes about forty eight hours, something like that, and you've seen movie representations of it, but it's been compared by reasonable observers to having a very bad flu. So, alcohol withdrawal, by the way - that kills you often. You have a seizure and you die. So if you're an alcoholic and you go to the hospital and you need to detoxify, they'll give you valium or something like that so you don't seize yourself to death while you're withdrawing. You know, when you have a hangover, part of that is that - part of what's happened is you've actually lowered your seizure threshold. Something to think about if you're prone to seizures. It's a bad idea to have a hangover. In fact they bred mice to study hangovers. They bred mice that could drink alcohol and then they'd get a very bad hangover, and if you showed them a cat, they would have a seizure. So, because the fear was enough to trigger seizures. So yeah, well you gotta get seizures going somehow if you're gonna study them, and that's - and that can be bred. So anyways, you take your heroin addict, let's say, and they get over their withdrawal and so that means that technically they're no longer physiologically dependant on the drug. Now that doesn't mean their work is over by no means. But frequently the treatment center, as long as the person is nowhere near where they usually are, once they've gone through withdrawal, they can stay away from the drug quite effectively, but the problem is as soon as you put them back in the situation that they came from, and they're around the things that have been associated with heroin, let's say, they get a craving. And the cravings haven't gone away. That's a different system than the system that went through withdrawal, and so they always relapse. Now, you think about how this craving works, and I've seen this probably most seriously I guess with cocaine addicts, but also with alcoholics. So, imagine what you have to do in order to become an addict. You know, the first thing is that you have to start using the drug. Okay, but that - and fair enough. People experiment with all sorts of drugs and so, you know, that's part of human nature. You know, it's risky and dangerous but it's not yet catastrophic. But then let's say you start using it enough so that you can't not use it. You have to use it everyday or something like that, and then the next thing that happens is that it gets a little bit expensive, and so then your life is starting to go downhill because you're spending all your time trying to gather resources to get some more of the drug. Now, what you might ask yourself is what do you have - like exactly what's the chain of behaviors that's being reinforced by the drug? Well somewhere along the way, you know, maybe when you're just starting to misuse it, there's part of you that's saying, "You know, really this is probably not a good idea." And then there's another part of you that has a different thought which might be, "Oh to hell with it. It's only one. It's only tonight." And so then you take the drug, and then there's chain leading from the thought to the drug behavior. But the drug reinforces all the way back along that chain. So what happens is that little system that thinks, "Oh to hell with it, it's only one night," gets a little stronger. Now, it doesn't get as strong as the systems that are being reinforced that are activated directly before the drug hit, but the thing is that maybe you take heroin in fifty different situations and so you're conditioning yourself to cues in all those different situations. You use slightly different behaviors and so on, so there's different things being shaped, but one of the things that's always being reinforced, even though not that much, is this thought pattern, and the thought pattern is something like "Oh to hell with it, doesn't matter anyways" because you have to think that in order to - especially at the beginning of a nice downhill trip. You have to think that, and so what happens is you build this monster in your head. It's full of lies and rationalizations, and they are whatever lies and rationalizations allowed you to continue the behavior to begin with. But you're making them more and more potent, and so you build a sub personality inside of you that it's a one eyed monster, fundamentally. All it wants is the drug, and it's armed with any number of perfectly, depends on how smart you are, you know. You can come up with a very powerful, nihilistic rational argument why - about why life is futile and your future is dead and there's nothing better to do anyways, and you'd be a fool to engage in such a destructive society, and etcetera, etcetera. Like you can conjure up a very - an argument that's virtually impermeable to rational argument. Rational counterargument. Because you know, there's some things that you just can't prove. Like you can't prove life is intrinsically worthwhile you know, because for obvious reasons. So, now the reason I told you that is because I think it's a good example of how things are nested inside of each other you know, and also the relationship between this very large nesting of concentric lenses, let's say, and the way that those things are shaped and reinforced across time. Whenever you're acting locally, and something goes the way you want it to, let's say, and not the way you expect because that's what Sokolov, and Vinogradova, and Jeffrey Gray, and the people who were looking at the orienting response first presumed. They'd presumed that you wanted things to go the way you expect, but that's not exactly right, and it's an important distinction. You want things to go the way you want them to go, and if it's just expectation then it's just a cold, cognitive model of the world right. It's like robotic. Okay, A happened, now B should happen. Now C should happen. It's like that isn't how you think at all. You're always inside a motivational frame, and it isn't only that you expect the next thing to happen, but if the next thing happens, it matters whether it's what you want or not. If it's what you want, then that little system is reinforced. It's pleasurable for you, and then the whole hierarchy grows a little bit stronger, and if it is not what you want then you have a problem. And that's where things get weird and interesting. So okay, so you're going along from point A to point B, and you can see tools and you can see obstacles, and obstacles are anything that get in your path. What that means in some sense is that what a tool is and what an obstacle is switches very rapidly as you change focus, and as your intent changes. So it's a dynamic system. Alright, and so the way emotion works in this regard is if things are going the way you want them to then you feel positive emotion and that keeps you moving towards your goal, and if you run into an obstacle, then you feel negative emotion. Okay so, the next issue might be well just exactly what should you experience when you experience negative emotion? Well you might say well that's a tricky question because if you encounter an obstacle, that means that something about your model is wrong because if it was right, you wouldn't have encountered that obstacle. So this is a very interesting way of thinking. It's a pragmatic way of thinking because what it illustrates is that whenever you do something, you're acting out a theory of truth, and the theory of truth is the actions that I'm undertaking at the moment are sufficient to reach the goal that I'm aiming at, and so you set up a theory of truth with each act. So, you're always struck with the reality of truth and error or correct and incorrect because you can't posit that a goal is worth having, and if there's a path to it that might be clear or obstructed without also saying it matters whether you know what you're doing. Okay, so you hit an obstacle, and that produces negative emotion. Now, the problem you have here is that in principle, the reason you hit that obstacle could be that there's an error in your nested model at any level of the model. So and that's why I told you about the little story of the sun. It's like normally you just turn your computer on and off because something has happened that's local, but now and then your problem is that the sun isn't as reliable as you might like it to be. And so, you're faced with this insanely complex problem not when things go right because when things go right, you can just continue ignoring everything that you're ignoring, but when they go wrong, the search space that opens up before you is just about infinite. Now, that has real world consequences. I mean, one of the things that happens when people develop panic disorder - what seems to happen is that... I can tell you the typical story about how you would develop panic disorder with agoraphobia cause the two things are somewhat separate. So generally this happens to - it generally happens to women. It generally happens in their forties. Women are more susceptible to anxiety and depression, and men are more susceptible to substance abuse and antisocial behavior. Figures that something would go wrong right now doesn't it? Okay, so now what do I ask myself? Well, is this relevant. Is it going to disrupt the class? Does it mean that there's something wrong with my computer? Should I call the help people? And I'll say no we'll ignore it on the assumption it will continue working, and until that hypothesis fails then we can ignore it. Okay so... So something goes wrong and this search space opens up in front of you. Now okay, back to the agoraphobic. So what happens to her usually is generally these are people who've had dependant relationships and perhaps they had a relatively overprotective family, or let's just say protective family, and then they had an intimate relationship early in their life and maybe that lasted quite a long time or maybe they're just married to the same guy, but the - and inside that relationship, she's relatively dependant which means probably she doesn't go anywhere without her husband, you know, she doesn't do a lot of things autonomously let's say. Okay, so then she hits menopause and you know, she's getting some strange physiological symptoms from that of various sorts. And maybe at the same time, maybe she talks to her husband about a divorce or maybe he talks to her about a divorce or maybe her sister gets divorced or maybe a close friend dies or maybe she starts to experience heart palpitations because of the menopause. And then she thinks, "Oh my god. That could happen to me. It's like my whole world can fall apart." So that's one fear. "My whole world could fall apart." So that's sort of the fear of societal catastrophe - the collapse of the structure. And then the other fear is often, "Oh my god. I could be dying of a heart attack." And so what happens to people who start to develop panic disorder is that they end up going to the emergency room all the time to be checked out by cardiologists, and the cardiologists are used to this, and they generally check people up quite extensively but most of the time if there's something up with your heart, there's nothing wrong. But there could be, and so then the sort of... what happens is the person who is developed agoraphobia starts thinking perhaps about what would happen if her husband died or if they got divorced, and then she starts thinking about the fact that well she doesn't really know what she'd do, and she doesn't really know how to take care of a bunch of things and how she might take care of the finances and so forth. And so, she has no real place to turn, and so then she makes the fatal mistake. She goes out and she starts to panic, and then she goes home. That's not good. So if you ever develop severe anxiety, the one thing you don't want to do is avoid because of it because as soon as you avoid because of it, it gets worse, and the reason for that is imagine her anxiety systems are trying to figure out how afraid she should be, and it ranges from panic stricken to none. Well, the anxiety systems have all sorts of sources of input because they're trying to calculate a very difficult problem because, you know, when this thing flickered, one of the things that everyone does is look around, and the reason you do that - it's called referencing. Social referencing. It's like, "Well how upset should I be about this? What's going on?" and you look at everyone's face and you see well they're upset or they're not upset and everybody kind of comes to an average agreement about how upsetting this is, and we do that very, very rapidly, you know, and we estimate how anxious we should be by our default neuroticism, so I would say generally speaking, if you have higher levels of negative emotion, rather than lower levels, what happens is you - the severity that you estimate a given uncertain event to exist to have is higher than the severity someone else might estimate if they were more emotionally stable. And then there's another input which is well roughly how competent do people around you and you think you are because, you know, how afraid you should be is actually somewhat proportionate to how competent you are right? I mean, if you're a well practiced hunter and you're out in the forest, and a bear charges you, it's like well maybe you've seen a hundred bears and you know what to do and it's like it's a bear and all that, but you're not gonna run. And so then the bear probably won't think you're prey because the bear thinks that if you run, that you're edible. Now the thing that's really interesting is that if you watch yourself run, then your brain thinks you're edible too. So that's another input so because - so the anxiety system is doing this terribly difficult calibration job which is "Okay something happened. How upset should I be?" Well, how upset are other people? What's my physiological response? How does it compare to other times I was upset. What are my options? That's a good one because one of the things the anxiety systems really wants is that it wants you to come up with a plan. It doesn't really care what the plan is although you have to believe it because it's not really a sophisticated cognitive system, it's an alarm bell and it says, "Look, something's up here. You have to knit up your world again, and put it to rest. We need to be able to ignore everything again," and if you can't do that, that thing will just go off forever. That's what happens at least in part to people who have post traumatic stress disorder. They're soldiers, you know, and maybe they've gone out in battle and they've watched themself do terrible things cause that's actually one of the most common precedents of post traumatic stress disorder, and they have no idea how to represent that in their hierarchical world model, you know, because part of your world model, a huge part of it - the "What is" part, you know, is who you are. Well it's like you might find out that you're not who you think you are. You aren't even who you think you are a little tiny bit. Like there's corners and nooks and whole unexplored rooms inside of you that contain things that if they ever come out, you're done. You don't know what to do with it, you know. And if you've dealt with something who has post traumatic stress disorder, it's very frequently the case you have to - they have to learn a philosophy of good and evil in order to recover. It has to be sophisticated because they've seen these terrible, destructive forces at work and their whole world model is just not handling it. So what happens is that the agoraphobic person runs, and then their anxiety system says well what's chasing them is obviously a flesh eating predator, and you know it isn't exactly that it thinks that although it might have dreams like that. They could easily have dreams of being pursued, but it's the same system like the system that we use to run away from things that ate us when we were thirty pounds is the same system that we now use to process relatively abstract threats. And why wouldn't it be? Look, as far as I'm concerned, this isn't even a hypothesis. It's like we know evolution is conservative. Everything builds on what was there before. So, what else are you gonna use when you're threatened by some abstract threat except the system that you used to use when you were threatened by a crocodile? So, it's only... it's exactly the way it works. So then you know, she ends up - question? Oh no, no you have to run from something. Just running, that's irrelevant. It's a huge difference. If you're running towards something, that's way different than if you're running away from something. Say you're like anxious about an assignment and you go for a run and come back more clear headed to work on it. You're not running from the assignment. Are you not? No, you're just going out for a run, and that's okay. Look, let me give you an example. Well it's a good question. Let me give you an example. If you take a stressor of a certain magnitude and you are interested in the response of two groups, if you let one group handle the stressor voluntarily, and you force the other group to handle the stressor involuntarily, the second group will produce much more cortisol which is the primary stress hormone, and so voluntary approach - you use different psychophysiological systems for voluntary approach than you do for retreat and you know, part of what you're doing when you're training someone or when you're using exposure with someone who has agoraphobia is that you're teaching them that the voluntary approach system, if you activate that, that's a very good way of coping with anxiety. Now they don't know that, in this situation that we're describing, because they're not autonomous. They haven't ever learned to rely on that system. So you know, if you're faced with a threat, there's a variety of things you can do. You can just panic, but panic is usually distress, you know. Maybe a child sort of does that when it starts crying. And what happens when the child starts crying? Well, someone comes to its rescue right. So one of the things you can do is emit distress cries and social resources will come and be gathered around you and maybe that'll solve the problem. But that doesn't work when your heart is palpitating because who's gonna fix that? Well often these people... If you look deeply into their thoughts maybe they're afraid to ride a subway and the actual reason they're afraid to ride the subway is they think, "Well what if the subway gets stopped between stations and I'm trapped on here and I have a heart attack and I can't get to the hospital?" So that hospital thing is running around in their head all the time because their default strategy for dealing with threat is to seek authority, and one of the things that often sets people up for developing agoraphobia is that the authority that they rely on suddenly becomes uncertain for one reason or another. Maybe the person is going to leave and they're isolated or maybe the person, like if it's a husband say, the person is - what good is that? If your heart's palpitating and you're gonna have a heart attack? It's a problem that can't be solved that way. You know, people might think about that as a whole existential crisis, and it is an existential crisis. It's like you're coming face to face with your own mortality, and that's certainly the case if you're going through menopause at the same time because that's another, you know, profound life shift that indicates you're sort of halfway done, or two-thirds of the way done. Something like that. And that's of course, you know, you can think about that in terms of terror management as well. So it is an existential crisis, and the question is how do you deal with it? And the answer to that generally is by becoming a lot tougher than you are, and the way you help people do that is teach them there are certain dangerous situations they can approach and they can approach them. And generally, people learn this quite quickly, you know, and so the psychoanalysts believe that if you just - this was their early criticisms of behavioral exposure was that, you know, if you expose someone who's afraid, say, just to an elevator that that will help their other fears or maybe the fear will be substituted somewhere else because it's just symptomatic. But that didn't work. It's not right, and it's because when you expose someone to an elevator, you're not exposing them to an elevator. If they're afraid of that elevator, you're exposing them to their own death. So the elevator, you could say well the reason behavioral exposure works - and it generalizes - is because it's not easy to specify what the stimulus is. I mean, when I'm in front of an elevator, it's an elevator. When someone with agoraphobia is in front of an elevator, it's not an elevator. That's the problem. If it was just an elevator, they'd just get on it and away they go. So you know, I had one client who was afraid of elevators and the elevator opened up and she said, "That's a tomb." And it was just an immediate response, you know, but you could say well that was the symbolic representation that came to mind, but you could also say that well there are similarities between an elevator and a tomb, and you can get trapped inside an elevator and you could get trapped inside an elevator and die in which case it would be a tomb, and the logical conclusion from that is that everything could be a tomb. So you might think, "Well the stimulus isn't tomb." Like yeah, yeah. Wrong. It can be tomb. It's unlikely, but then you might also ask yourself this. If the chance that you're going to die somewhere is a hundred thousand to one, should you be upset? And well the answer to that is dying is of infinite magnitude, and if you multiply one and a hundred thousand by infinite magnitude, you get a very very large number. And so one of the things that makes you wonder is why the hell are people terrified out of their skin all the time? That is a very good question because by no means obvious that people aren't, and I actually think - I often think that the mystery with a condition like agoraphobia isn't that some people have agoraphobia. It's that everyone doesn't have it all the time. So because - and you know the terror management people talk about this too is that because we're always confronting our own mortality and a world of infinite complexity, why aren't we constantly in a state of panic? And you know, now and then you realize that. You think jeez, why aren't we in a state of panic? It's a very unsettling realization, and why it isn't more common, that's a very, very complicated question. I think a lot of it is that we imitate other people, and so a lot of our faith, let's say, in the stability of our lives and the utility and the meaning of our lives is actually instantiated at an embodied level where it's not subject to criticism. So for example, I'll give you an example. There's a child two years old and there's a mother, and they're together in the kitchen, and a mouse runs across the floor. Okay, the child orients towards the mouse, watches it zip across, and then looks at his mother or her mother. Why? Well because something anomalous has occurred, the significance of which is unstated, and it's arousing. It's like wow look at that, you know, you can be startled like that like "Wow look at that!" Zip! Well then you think, what does mum think of that? And mum is thinking, "Oh that's a mouse," maybe she'll tell you about mice or maybe she'll set a trap or something. But she's calm, and so the child imitates that, and then you know, they've got this sense in their body that human beings can deal with mice and that's no problem. The alternative is that the mouse comes up and the mother jumps up on the table and starts screaming. It's like well, you could be sure what's the child gonna do in a situation like that is burst into tears and be extraordinarily upset. So a lot of what we're doing when we're little, and we watch people around us is that they model being calm. So we just adopt the implicit assumption - it's an embodied assumption - that you can be calm in these circumstances and luckily enough, we generally don't - that generally doesn't come unglued, but you can unglue it even by deep thought, and that happens to people quite frequently. That would be an existential catastrophe. Alright so, let me show you something else here. So, same idea. Now, this is changed a little bit. So you're going from point A to point B, and what can happen? Well you can encounter tools and you can encounter obstacles and you can zero almost everything out. But you can look at it this way too. When you're moving forward, you can encounter what you predict. That should really be desired rather than predictiveness in the old diagram, or you can encounter something that you didn't predict or desire, and if you encounter something that you predict and desire, then you have positive emotion and we know why that is. You're getting to where you want to go and it validates the whole structure. But then, you run into something unpredicted. Well then, you get - that's a threat and you get anxious. Well you also get exploratory. So then you might say well, how anxious do you get and how exploratory do you get, and I would say it's proportional - imagine the hierarchy again. If you feel that it's just an inconvenience that you can make a mild alteration and direct action and go over, you'll be mildly inconvenienced and maybe you'll be a bit curious, but what happens is that as your suspicion that the error is occurring at higher and higher and broader and broader levels in the hierarchy, the probability that you're going to be anxious, and quite anxious compared to exploratory at least initially, starts to mount. So, and then, all those other factors also play a role. You know, your social status, your neuroticism, your sense of self competence. How much you've explored all those other things is a very complicated thing to address, and so alright. So then you're going to concentrate on what happens if you experience an unpredicted outcome because here's the complicated question. If you experience an unpredicted outcome, then you have a weird problem. The problem is that you have to figure out what to do about something that you don't know what to do about, and that's a big problem. So...let's start with this one. Alright so, you're going. You're in the top left hand corner. You're in this little frame, and you're going from point A to point B, and you encounter - I'm calling it now - an anomaly, and anomaly is something that shouldn't be according to your model of the world. Now, what that does is it destabilizes that model at some level of resolution. Now what we're assuming here is that this is a relatively high order disruption. Okay so I can give you some examples of that. The heart palpitation example was a good one cause that'll kind of unglue you. Maybe you take your child to the hospital because they have a minor illness and you find out that they don't have a minor illness, they have a major illness, or you find that out about yourself or you find that about your partner, or maybe the stock market crashes or you have a car accident or you write the MCAT and you end up in the twenty fifth percentile like the quarter of the people who take it do, and then all of a sudden bang. You're not where you thought you were, and you're not going to where you thought where you were going and you don't know what the hell's going on, and that can be as we said, a small revolution. You just have to make a detour around it, or it can just sucker punch you, and that's as far as I've been able to determine, that's Alice down the rabbit hole. That's a descent to the underworld, and what's down in the underworld? Well partly what's down - everything is down there in the underworld, and the reason for that...it's very complicated but part of the reason is that when things fall apart, you don't get to ignore things anymore because you had this model that told you what was relevant in the world and what wasn't and the real important part of that model was that it told you what wasn't relevant, and then all of a sudden something pops up and takes you down. It's like everything's relevant. Everything's potentially relevant, and that's terribly stressful because everything is should I be angry? Should I be upset? Should I cry? Should I get divorced? Should I run away? Should I commit suicide? It's like how am I come up with a new plan? Where am I gonna get money? Who's going to help me? What's my future going to look like? What does my past look like? What am I going to do today? What am I gonna do tomorrow? It's like all of these things come up and some of that weirdness in the external world, and that would be well, let's say that you discover that your child's sick, and let's say the doctors really don't know what to do about it. Okay so, you've just been handed a problem of infinite complexity, and a problem of infinite complexity is like a journey through a maze that has no end. It's a branching maze, and so what you'll find yourself doing, for example, is going on the internet and spending hundreds of hours - if you've got a research oriented mind - hundreds of hours looking up every single research article you can possibly find on this condition, and that'll range from like the farthest out new age ideas to the most cutting edge science, if you can handle that. So, you know, good luck with that. That's an infinite search, and then that's not the only problem because - so the fact that it's an infinite search is very bad for you because there's no way you can calculate how much time and energy it's going to take you to solve the problem. So, that's stressful. Why? Well obviously it's stressful. It means you have an infinite journey towards an uncertain goal, and you can't even handle that you know. I mean, your journeys have to be such that they're self sustaining right? I mean, generally speaking, when you're on a journey of some sort, you have to obtain as much matter and energy as the journey costs, and maybe a bit more because you're storing some up for the future. But if you've got this path of infinite complexity laying out in front of you, it's like your body can't calibrate that and so what it does is it throws you into emergency reaction mode and emergency reaction mode is prepare for everything, and that's not good. And so, down there in the underworld the world itself turns into a maze of infinite complexity, but you turn into a mass of competing models, and a lot of them are based in very low level motivation. You're going to be angry. That's for sure. You might be angry god only knows for how long, you know, if it's a particularly nasty disease. You might be angry for the rest of your life, and you know, you can be angry in a small way and accept fate, or you can be so angry that it completely consumes you and you're out for revenge against being itself, and that happens to people, and that's only one of the emotions and motivational states that are going to be hyper activated by the response, and so what happens is that your system collapses into the underlying basic motivational states and so you're anxious, and afraid, and angry, and exploratory, and upset, and all of these things all at the same time, and that is your reaction to the unknown. Your reaction to the unknown is stop, because you aren't where you thought you were, and then the next thing is prepare for anything, and the way you prepare for anything is by getting ready to do whatever it is that you can do. So, I kinda think about it as you're in a car and you've got the gas pedal pushed right to the metal and you've got the break on at the same time, so the car's roaring away but - and you know if you take the foot off the break, man it's gonna move, but your foot isn't off the break because you don't know where to go but you're still running at full tilt, and that's not psychological exactly right. It's psychophysiological because you're an energy and material burning system, and if you crank yourself up into high gear then you're going to be burning a lot more energy and material, and what happens to people is that well one of the things that happens is that you'll shut your immune system off because if you're being - because it's costly - if you're being chased by a tiger, who the hell cares if you get the flu in two weeks. It's like shut that thing off. Everything that has to do with long term survival, even your ability to think into the long term, is going to be shut off because your ability to think in the long term failed, and so you default back down to instantaneous impulsive modes of actions, and it's the right thing to do. You might think, "Oh well this is a hell of a time to have a cloudy mind," but - and sometimes that's the case - but you're wired up. You're trying to solve this impossible problem which is what the hell do you do when you don't know what to do, and the only answer to that is prepare for everything because you're going to gather some more information and that might tell you what needs to be done next but you have no idea how fast it's going to have to be done. It might be like you need to do this right now or you don't get it don't at all. So then you're down there in the underworld where all the, you know, great motivational beasts lurk and where there's an infinite path in front of you that's - and maybe you don't get out, and that's the thing too. The thing is that this isn't psychological, and one of the real problems with modern clinical psychology and modern psychiatry - just conceptually - is that people automatically assume that if you have a problem, like if you're depressed and unhappy and anxious, well then that's a mental problem. It's a psychological problem. It's like it's a problem insofar as it's not pleasant, but what if you're in a horrible situation? Well you know, the cognitive people would say, "Well you know, you just have to reconstrue it." It's like yeah if you can reconstrue it man, you're not in a horrible situation, you know, and one of the things you see with the cognitive behaviorists for example is when they assess depression, they use the Beck Depression Inventory, and I've given the Beck Depression Inventory to hundreds of people, and their criteria for when you should be an outpatient in a psychiatric ward is probably the level of depression that one-third of you experienced the first year that you were in university cause I've given this instrument to lots of university students and one-third of them, at least in the first year, meet criteria for hospitalization with the Beck. So the way that cognitive behaviorist people - what do you call - evade this issue is that they just set their diagnostic instrument so low that the people that they described as depressed actually don't have a problem, you know, so I think the cutoff for outpatient is fifteen. You know, you're not happy when you get a fifteen on the Beck, but if you're depressed you get a sixty. It's like you're depressed, and then you talk to someone like that and you find out well maybe you're depressed or maybe you just have a terrible life, and the terrible life is - and good luck reconstruing that man. So you're not very bright, for example, and that's a big problem so maybe you have an IQ of 85, or maybe you have an IQ of 80. It's like good luck finding a job, and if you do find one, it's not gonna pay, and it's not going to be stable, and you're not going to get good hours, and so then well you know your only friend is crazy, and then your family is like distorted and twisted up beyond belief so maybe you know, your mother is chronic alcoholic with dementia. That'd be a nice touch, and you know, maybe your friends aren't only not very good for you, they're actively bad for you because you've fallen in with some bloody psychopaths, and because you're not particularly bright, they can get your money every time you get your support check, your unemployment check or something like that. Well you know, you get someone like that in your practice and you think, well they're unhappy. Are they depressed? Well, no. They're in the underworld. It's not the same thing. Here's depressed. Depressed is someone comes in. They're reasonably well educated. They have a job, and when you ask them about the job, they say, "Well you know, I used to like my job" or maybe "I even do like my job but I just don't find that I'm motivated right now, and I can't understand why." Then you ask them about their marriage and they say, "Well you know, I have a good marriage" and then you ask them about their family and they say, "Well, I've got the average number of family problems but it's, you know, all things considered it's not too bad." And so, and then they don't have a drug or alcohol problem, but they score like thirty on the Beck. You think, "Hey, you can take some antidepressants. You're depressed. You don't have a terrible life." You know, and they know that. They often don't have any real cognitive symptoms either, although they might be reacting more negatively to some of the negative things that are happening. With those people, something's gone astray, you know, maybe their sleep is upset. That's often the case. So and what they're suffering from is disequilibrium of sleep wake rhythms, so it's gone out of whack. So you straighten up their sleep and they're better, or sometimes they need antidepressants, but for the first person, like antidepressants might take the edge off and maybe not too, but - and what are you gonna do? You're gonna get the person to reconstrue? That assumes they have options, you know, and the problem with educated smart people is they think everybody has options because they do. It's like no, that's not right. Some people have - some people have no options. They're like trapped in a corner, and no matter how hard you try, you cannot get them out of the corner. Sometimes it takes a virtual miracle before that can happen. So the thing about the underworld is that it's a real place. It's a real place, and - depending of course on how you define place, but that's exactly the issue. How should you define place? Well, I would say for the sake of argument that you might as well define it two ways. You might as well use the standard Newtonian view, you know, that the world's made out of inanimate material entities, arrayed in a certain manner, because that's a very useful approach to many problems. But then there's another perspective which is no, no, no, the meanings that array themselves in front of you in the world - those are real. And you know, I would also say - I'll just mention this very briefly. It's something the idea I've been working on for a long time is that there's an implication of Darwinian theory, and the implication is that - we talked about this a little bit - the environment is very complex and it's transforming unpredictably, and so what that means is you can never be right about the environment. So right, correct is out of reach. The best you can do is come to partial - you can partially accommodate it, and so you'd say okay well how have we partially accommodated it? Okay so here we are. We've been evolving for three and a half billion years, given it our best shot, and here we have these bodies, and they're out solution to the problems posed by the transforming environment, and you might say, "Well how good a solution are those?" Well, you've got seventy years. It's the best we've been able to manage in three and a half billion years is to generate up a biological platform that has enough flexibility to keep up with the environment for about 75 years. So then you think, so there's no final answer to the problem the environment presents. There isn't, and it's because it actually changes unpredictably. So there's no way of being right. Now then you might say, well what does right mean? Well, from the Darwinian perspective, from some sense there's no other right than that you're alive and you're likely to reproduce. That's the best you ever get. Okay so let's say that's your pragmatic definition of right. Well then what that means is if that is right, as far as right can be determined, as far as being human is concerned, then when you are reacting by fleeing or freezing when something terrible is chasing you because you perceive it as a threat, the fact that it's a threat is right. It's not an overlay on reality. It's like if you didn't perceive a predator as a threat, then you would get eaten, and so I think - you know, you can think of the Darwinian world as nested inside the Newtonian world which is how most scientists think, but I don't believe that. I think it's the other way around. I think the Darwinian world is the ultimate world in a sense, and the Newtonian world is just a tiny subset of that and it's a useful subset. It's a tool. It's useful subset, but the real world - the Darwin takes precedence over all knowledge structures. That's how it looks to me, and I don't see a way out of that argument. So, I mean it depends to a large - Yup. So are you saying that - cause I'm trying to understand what you're saying. Are you saying that like our estimations of like the deterministic, material world is nested in an evolutionary drive to find truth so that we can make quick assumptions about our environment? Yeah, so well here's another example. You guys can think about this for a minute if you'd like. So, let's say that one of the logical consequences of pursuing science from a Newtonian perspective is that you learn how to create - cross ebola with smallpox which is what the KGB was trying to do in the 1980s. Okay, so you manage that and everyone dies. It's like, how's that for a validation of science? You know, it's like - because this could happen right? Our technological capability which is fostered by this particular model could easily enable us to produce something that will wipe all of us out. And then well are you gonna say, "Well yeah apart from that, it was right." And then I'd think it's a tricky argument because okay let's say - but here's part of the problem, and I also thought the same thing about hydrogen bombs. It's like well obviously the quantum view, let's say, is accurate because if you follow it you can make a hydrogen bomb. But then you can step back from that and you can say yeah, yeah, but to make a hydrogen bomb or to cross ebola with smallpox, you have to treat the matter that you're interacting with as if it's actually separate from everything else, and the thing is it's not actually separate from everything else. It's actually connected to everything else. Now you can say, well if you treat it as if it's separate, here's some operations you can undertake. You can cross ebola with smallpox, but then you've ignored a bunch of things like maybe that's not a good idea, and then everyone dies. And so the reductionism in the model which helps it specify its target and increase its accuracy has the corresponding negative consequence of pretending that the context within which these enterprises are being conducted can be ignored and that that's actually appropriate, and that's a big problem. It's a big problem. So the evolutionary framework provides the concepts because it provides like our sense of morality. Well, it's not only because of what it provides us. I think the reason that the evolutionary perspective has to be the one that supersedes is because you cannot model the environment. It's not possible. All you can do is keep up with it, and the only way you can keep up with it is through Darwinian processes - random. I mean I know it's not a complete theory, but for the sake of argument, you have to generate random alterations, and you know, you can say well in principle, we can understand everything scientifically. It's like no, in principle, we can't. Everything's too complex to understand. So that's why Newtonian physics is nested within a Darwinian perspective. That's right. Because it's just an estimation whereas a Darwinian perspective, it's like it's more in line with what's actually - It's more in line with reality. Yeah, whereas the Newtonian perspective comes out of a rough estimation of what reality is like. Well Jung, when Jung was talking about the origin of the scientific mindset, you know, he traced its development back to alchemy. Here's another reason why the scientific mindset is necessarily nested in the mythological mindset. So what the alchemists were trying to do is mess around with matter and to produce something. They argued for centuries what this thing was. This philosopher's stone, and what the philosopher's stone would enable the holder of it to do would be to transmute elements into gold, so that would make you rich, and it would provide immortality and perfect health for the person who discovered it. Okay, now what Jung said - and we'll talk about this. If I have enough energy, we'll talk about this two-thirds of the way through class because it's so damn complicated that some years I can't muster up enough energy to discuss it, but Jung believed that, you know, people have always been trying to cope with their mortality, right, and their vulnerability. Okay, fine, and that makes perfect sense. So he did an analysis of Western history, roughly speaking, and said well what happened - there was a Christian epoch, maybe, that lasted around 1,600 years, roughly speaking, and there was an idea at the base of it and the idea was that through spiritual discipline, man could transcend suffering, but - the problem with that was that all this suffering kept happening, and you know, and there was some warps in the idea, as Nietzsche pointed out how this ceasing of suffering was only going to happen after you die. Okay fine, then you live forever in bliss, but still there's like black plague and babies dying and crops failing, and it's like it just doesn't seem that you can just ignore that, and so you've got 1,500 or 1,600 years of Christianity, and you know, the whole history of Christianity behind that grinding away on this problem trying to produce a system of redemption, and it doesn't work or it works partially. And it also ignores certain things. So partly what it ignores, you know, one of the presuppositions of, say, medieval Christianity is that the world, roughly speaking, is an evil place, and that matter is corrupt and unworthy of attention. Well, one of Jung's hypothesis is that if you ignore something long enough, then it starts to demand your attention, you know. It's like a repression, and then that's especially the case if there's a problem that you're trying to solve that your current worldview isn't really solving. It's like your attention is going to be drawn unconsciously to that which you've ignored and put down, and so Jung saw the development of alchemy as a parallel to the development of Christianity, but alchemy studied matter, which was forbidden in a sense. It was damned from the Christian perspective. The alchemists were studying the transmutations of matter. They had an intuition that there was information locked in that. In matter. And that if you could just figure out how to interact with it properly, then you can free up the information, and they symbolized that in the dreamlike manner. The dreamlike manner was you could discover the philosopher's stone and that would give you, you know, wealth, health, and eternal life. Well as far as Jung was concerned, that was a dream, and it was like an artistic production. It was like the scaffolding of the scientific perspective because it isn't like people went from medieval Christianity to full fledged scientists like overnight. It took hundreds of years for this to occur. There were changes in the substrata of thought that were occurring as this was happening and Jung traced that back more than 1,600 years in the development of alchemy. And so, the dream of alchemy was that you could discover - you could master the transmutations of matter such that there would be no disease, that no one would die, and everyone was wealthy. Well okay that, as far as Jung was concerned, that provided the motivation for science because one of the things you might ask is well, why do people do science. I mean, most people never have right. It's not very old. Six hundred years. It only emerged in one place, roughly speaking. It's very fragile, and unlikely, and plus just think of what you have to do if you're a scientist. You know, if you're a scientist and you use a microscope - a high powered microscope - you have to spend ten thousand hours looking through that damn thing before you can see what's there, and so you think that's a weird thing for a tree dwelling ape to be doing. You know what I mean, it's such a warp of our natural, of our natural instincts and our, you know, our desire to make contact with other people and to be doing something exciting, and you're looking through this damn tube, you know, and it's even painful. What the hell is motivating you? And the answer would be, well you think you're doing something good. You think that science is going to benefit mankind. So it's nested necessarily in a motivated system. It isn't that you do science because you want to discover facts. It's that you do science to discover facts so that things improve. Isn't it? And you just can't ignore the fact that you're doing it in the hopes that things will improve. You can't just take that out of the equation and say, "No I'm purely objective." It's like A, you're not and you better not be, you know, because a purely objective person wouldn't be a person. You couldn't even communicate with someone like that. Plus they wouldn't be able to - someone like that wouldn't be able to determine what was relevant - distinguish what was relevant and what wasn't relevant. You need motivational systems to do that, and I can tell you. When you're looking at a data set, there's an infinite number of things that you can look at in that data set. Literally. I mean there's no end to the statistical procedures that you can implement. It's like fiddling with a photo with Photoshop. It's like man, you can fiddle with that damn thing for the rest of your life, and so what that means is that the complexity that's there can't be dealt with objectively because if you deal with it objectively, there's no way of separating the one path through the data from all the other millions of paths through the data. It's not like when you're doing statistics man, it's not like you take a bunch of numbers and you feed it through the meat grinder and out comes the results. It is absolutely nothing like that. You're making ethical choices at every single level of the decision, and you know, if you're - and I teach my students this too. So I want them to be straight scientists, and there's lots of things that can warp you as a scientist, and one can be you want to have a career, and the other is you want to climb up the primate, the scientist primate dominance hierarchy, and you know fair enough. You need to have a career, and maybe the ambition is worth it, but the problem with that is that can make you do things that violate the principles of the entire enterprise, and that's happening - I mean it's been scandalous particularly in social psychology because people do what's called data mining and they just keep doing their analysis until something significant pops up and then they write a story about why that's important. I'm not cynical about that. I understand why it happens. I think it's inevitable that it happens some because lots of people who are publishing, it's like the first bloody thing or second thing they've ever published. They don't know what they're doing. There's gonna be error like mad. But I tell my students, "Look. If you're going to do statistical analysis properly, you have to get yourself oriented. What the hell are you doing? What is it that you're really doing?" And you think well I'm trying to discover something solid, and the reason I'm trying to do that is because there should be benefits from that otherwise the whole enterprise is foolish, and you might as well be a bloody - you might as well go work in finance if you're not interested in that because - really, you're not going to make any money as a scientist and you can make lots of money in finance, and you're smart enough to go into finance. So, if that's what you want - if you want power and money, and I'm not complaining about that, it's like go where it is. But science isn't it. If you want to discover facts, maybe, and that maybe of some benefit at some point, then you become a scientist. Okay, so that you gotta keep your eye on the ball, and then you have to decide if pursuing that line of truth and benefit supersedes whatever you might do to build your career. Okay, cause you're always playing that game. Always. Your whole life, and that's actually why so much of scientific research is wrong. There's error too, and there's all sorts of other reasons, and you can't expect a system to do much better than produce five percent of useful output anyways. So, okay and then the other thing is you have to also be afraid, and here's what you should be afraid of. Let's say that you discover something that isn't there. Okay, then you're gonna spend the next fifteen years studying it. So if you wanna spend your next fifteen years studying this thing that you've conjured out of nothing, then go right ahead. But if you don't want to do that, then you better be properly oriented when you do your statistical analysis, and that's because statistical analysis is an ethical process, and so is science because it has to be. If it isn't nested inside ethics, fundamentally, then god only knows. It can be completely destructive. It could be counterproductive. Like, so - ah so then there's a variety of reasons why the Darwinian bucket is sort of - it's the outside. You don't get any farther out than that as far as I can tell. So, and it's the Darwinian world to which we're adapted, you know. That's why we perceive things as threats. That's why we perceive things as positive. That's why we perceive things as negative. You know, and we tend to think those are overlays on a deeper reality. It's like that is not so clear, and you know, I didn't know this but when I was working out these ideas, I had never read anything that Heidegger had written although his influences wormed its way into many fields and I undoubtedly picked up some of his ideas, you know, because they get embedded in other places, but certainly one of Heidegger's claims was that Western philosophy got off on the wrong foot right at the beginning because it didn't study being. It started to think about thought, and what's - the real issue is being what is being? Well being is what you experience, and for the Heideggerians, that's reality. There isn't a reality underneath that. Now, it requires a real shift in perspective to start to try to think that way, and I think the easiest way to do it is to think both ways, you know. Sometimes you think like a Newtonian. Fair enough, and then other times you don't. And you need to know when to think like a Newtonian, and when to think like someone who understands that the phenomena of meaning that surrounds us are legitimate, and it's a very interesting thing, and this is one of the things that's really driven me through this material is okay so we can make a case that like lower order meanings are real. Like if you perceive a bear or a cliff as a threat, then that's so you don't die, and it's worked really well for things that have been chased by bears for ever since there's been bears, and way before that. But then there's another question that emerges. So okay, here's the question. So, you've got all these underlying motivational systems that are built into you as a consequence of evolutionary processes. So let's say it's your body and the manifestation of your body in your brain, in your mind. It's your basic mammalian wiring, and you've been working on that ever since we've had nervous systems. It's a very long period of time. That sets you up. Now you have to add complexity to that, right, because when you're trying to - because those systems only have a finite time range so when you're angry, for example, you're angry right now and in fact part of a utility of angry is that it's right now because it's a problem solving mechanism for dealing with some obstacle that you can't get rid of any other way than to say, "To hell with the future," roughly speaking and deal with it right now. Now it's dangerous, obviously, but it's also necessary because otherwise maybe you get locked into an argument, and you just stand there arguing for the rest of your life, you know. At some point you say, I'm not talking to you anymore, and the anger does that. It makes you impulsive and you can walk away. You know, and sometimes that's the right conclusion to an argument. You know, you're not going to win, and you don't want to keep arguing so why do you stop? You get annoyed. It's a solution. You've got all these basic biological systems. Now obviously, no one of them has the answer, and you know that because if it did, you wouldn't need a bunch of them, and you have a whole bunch of them. You have pain, and anxiety, and exploration, and play, and sexuality, and hunger, and thirst, and you know you can come up with probably twelve basic emotions and motivational systems. Okay, so you need all twelve of those in order to orient yourselves properly in the world just like you need your five senses, but then another problem starts to emerge and that problem is okay, those things have to be regulated properly, but they have to be regulated across multiple spans of time, and then they have to be regulated across multiple different complexities of social environment. So you don't just have one system of twelve. Now, you have a very large number of systems of twelve for very long spans of time, so then you think, well out of that emerges a solution. We talked about already with the evolution of games. Out of that emerges a solution. You might think about those as higher order meanings. So, and you know that, and you do it and you believe it. That's the thing that's cool. Here you are in university. Well you ask yourself why? You might think, well what do you have to believe in order to be university? Well, at some point, your beliefs run out and you're just here because you've made that decision. But I can ask you, you know, why are you in university? And most people have about five reasons, and then they don't know what to say. So what that means is they have reason A, and reason B, and reason C, and reason D, and then they're just acting it out after that, and if you keep questioning them, they get perturbed and they'll get annoyed. Sometimes they'll cry. Sometimes they'll get angry, like if you're really going after someone, it's like what the hell are you up to and why? You know, sometimes you have to do that to untangle something very complex. At some point, people just - they get angry or they cry, and that means to hell with you or you're bullying me, leave me alone, and that's supposed to get rid of you, you know, but it doesn't work if you really want to get down to the answers. Well, partly what we're trying to figure out is why the hell are you in university? You might say, "Well, to get a job," but I might say, "Well why in the world would that make you satisfied with life?" Why do you think that would make you satisfied with life, and you might say, "Well it's better than not having a job." It's like yeah yeah fair enough, you know, like right let's not forget the practical, but it isn't the solution. It's part of a solution, and the question is do you really believe there's a solution? Well you must because you believe it enough so that you're here, and then you believe that has something to do with the ability to think - and you believe that has something to do with the necessity of understanding your history and you believe that it has something to do with the utility of exposing yourself to what in principle are great rate historical and literary works. You assume that that's all valid because even if it's implicitly, if it's implicitly, it means you're imitating someone who assumes all that, but either way here you are. You're doing something, and the questions is - and maybe this is the critical, I think this was the critical question of the 20th century. Is there any reality to what you are doing, or is it just arbitrary? If it's arbitrary, well you know that's a path to nihilism because who cares what you do? Whatever you do, you're ruined. You can make a strong case for that, you know. But the problem with that seems to be nihilism - try it for a while, you know. What it produces is misery, and people generally believe in misery, and they generally believe that it's not a good thing to have, and so I would say nihilism is a self defeating proposition if you assume that misery is actually a source of valid information, and you all do because you know, if someone is jabbing you with a pen, you're going to move you arm because you feel that if you can avoid some misery, that's a good thing. So you have faith in your experience at that level. Well then you might say well you know, if you can really make a solid case for the believability for certain kinds of experiences, that they're real, why can't you make a case for the believability for higher forms of meaning? Maybe they're not arbitrary. We don't know, but I tell you if you act like they're arbitrary, you get into trouble very, very rapidly because you either become nihilistic or halfway down the trip to nihilism, you adopt some horrible ideology and then you know, you're possessed by it, and then you're well - then you're not going to live your own life because you're going to live the life of the ideology and you're going to be dangerous to everyone around you and also impervious to any sort of reasonable communication. So if those are the two consequences of making the presumption of arbitrary meaning at a higher order level, then to me, they've invalidated themselves already. We've already had that experiment. It didn't work. And so then the question is well what's next? Well that's partly what we're trying to figure out right now.
So momentarily we're going to return to the basic story. I want to talk to you today about how your brain organizes your perceptions, and then I want to talk to you about how that's represented in mythology. The first thing I'd like to point out, is we talked about the difference between Darwinian and Newtonian viewpoints a while back. One claim that you might make if you were Darwinian is that whatever your brain is adapted to is reality. That seems to be the central claim of Darwinian evolution, is that you can't define reality any more accurately than that which selects. I want to tell you about how I think the brain is organized. Then I want to show you, I hope, that the way fundamental narratives work can be mapped on to that brain structure. To me that implies that there's something right about fundamental narratives, because otherwise why would they map onto the brain structures that have evolved to adapt us to the environment? People think about reality in objective terms, and they think about it as decomposable into tiny subunits. I think that's a limited viewpoint, a powerful but limited viewpoint. I think it's much more realistic to assume that whatever reality is, is more like a continual interplay of very, very complex patterns. I suppose you could make the case that those patterns are ultimately made out of particles, but even that's not exactly true because the particles have to be arrayed in space. That's part of the atomic theory is that there's not just subatomic particles and atomic particles, but that they're arrayed in space. If they're arrayed in space, that means the manner in which they're arrayed can be informative. And if you reduce the phenoma to the particle, without taking into account the patterning of array of the particles, then there are levels and levels and levels of information that you lose. Those levels of information are - they may not be relevant for our physical understanding of the make-up of atomic and subatomic particles, but they're definitely relevant to whether we can walk across the street safely. I would say if you're related to reality properly, the kind of information that you're processing is precisely the kind of information that allows you to cross the street properly; and to do all the other things during your days, your weeks, your months that you have to in order to stay alive and fundamentally, in some sense, propagate. Alright, so we'll start with the neuropsychological argument. Now we've already established the idea that these little frames of reference, or maps, or stories, or whatever you call them - I'll call them stories from hereon in, are little gold-directed units. They're units of conception and emotion and perception and behavior; they're little sub-personalities. The sub-personality has an initial starting point and a destination point, and then it implements behaviors to transform the starting point into the destination point. Then you might say, well what forms these little sub-personalities? The answer to that is very complex, but one answer is: fundamental motivations. I arranged the fundamental motivations on this particular diagram pointing out that you can roughly consider motivations, as those that maintain you, and those that propagate you. Now it's just a heuristic, it's just a way of thinking about it. Under self-maintenance there's thermal regulation, thirst, hunger and elimination, and there's all sorts of other things as well, but those will do for the time being. Under self-propagation there's affiliative desire and sexual desire. The things that's quite interesting about all of this is that there are brain structures that underlie the manifestation of these fundamental sub-personalities. Now people tend to think about them either as motivations or emotions, and I think that's another useful heuristic. You can say that, roughly speaking, that a motivation pops up an entire frame of reference and emotion tends to orient you within that frame of reference. But that's only a conceptual simplification, because what you see when look at the actual brain structures is that there isn't an emotion center - there are a bunch of micro-units in the brain, and there are separable micro-units for different emotions and different motivations and they don't necessarily have that much in common in terms of their locale, except that they tend to be relatively deep in the brain. Some are hypothalamic and some are in the amygdala, and some are in the periaqueductal grey, which seems to be responsible for pain responses. So we can classify things as motivations and emotions, but it doesn't map one-to-one on the underlying brain structure. Now I think what we'll do with regards to talking about the brain is we'll start from the bottom up. It's appropriate to start from the bottom up because you are more dependent on your ancient brain structures than you are on your modern brain structures; in that, if you damage your modern brain structures, and I mean relatively modern, let's say the ones that have really evolved in great detail over the last two million years, the cortical cap, in particular, the prefrontal cortex, a lot of the visual cortex. If you damage that you can pretty much go on. Now you're going to have one impairment or another impairment, but you can still stay alive. However, there are structures that are lower down that if you damage, that's the end of you. So for example, the ascending reticular activating system, which is the thing that wakes you up when you're asleep at night, when a noise occurs that shouldn't occur. It seems to be the activating center for consciousness, whatever that means. It's way deep down in the brain, it's way deep down at the top of the spinal cord, roughly speaking. If you twist your head in a car accident a little bit too roughly, and you sheer off the ascending fibers, and you're in a coma permanently, then nothing can wake you up. That's pretty interesting - to know that consciousness, our tendency is to think about that as a function of the higher cortical systems, is dependent completely on something that is unbelievably ancient. So it begs the question, exactly what level of neuronal complexity do you have to be before you have sub consciousness? The answer to that is, we don't know. The relationship between consciousness and neuronal structure is insanely complex. For example, you have very neuron-heavy structures in your brain, like the cerebellum, which has a very rough outer-coating like the cortex, and it has about as many neurons as the cortical sheet does. Yet, you can take it out of people and they don't seem to show any impairment in consciousness, but they get ataxic and they can't control their behavior that well. They have a hard time guiding it - but that seems to be more or less it. Now it isn't, because there are other things that the cerebellum does, but my point is that you can have massively neuron-heavy structures that seem to be related in very minimal ways to our experience of consciousness. Your autonomic nervous system is sort of like that - there are a lot of neurons in your autonomic nervous system, but I think it's a mistake to say that we're precisely conscious of our autonomic nervous system; although now and then we're conscious of its outputs. It governs the operation of our organs and all the things that are so complex that we aren't allowed to mess with them as conscious beings. But it's not conscious, and then somehow some neurons are conscious. I tell you, we don't know anything about consciousness. We really don't, we don't have a clue. I think it's probably because we're formulating the question wrong. There are people who are materialist reductionists, and they believe that consciousness is an emergent property of the underlying neuronal function. The problem with that philosophy is that it's predicated on the assumption that they understand what the matter is that's making up that neuronal substrate. I can tell you that by the time we're able to reduce consciousness to its underlying material structure, we'll think of whatever matter is, in a way that's completely different than the way we think of it now. So there might be an eventual reduction, but at the same time there's going to be a transformation of the theories. It's clear that we don't understand material that well, particularly because when you go down to the tiny underlying substructures at the subatomic level it behaves in a very, very peculiar manner. So anyways, all bets are off in regards to consciousness. It also does seem to be something that's likely very ancient. There are people who have attributed consciousness to insects. Insects, by the way, seem to go out of their way to take hallucinogenic drugs, which is quite interesting. So the fly agaric, for example, is the famous red and white mushroom that you always see in fairy tales and in super Mario brothers. It pops up everywhere. Flies will come and take a bite of it and they fall unconscious beside the mushroom and they stay there for ten or fifteen minutes, and then they get up, but they go eat it again. Reindeer really like them too and they get blitzed out of their mind on amanita muscaria. There's evidence for the desire to transform states of consciousness, way, way down in the animal kingdom, way farther than you'd think. So God only knows. Then you think well a big brain is necessary, but if you consider something like Irene Pepperberg's African Grey parrot, which died a couple of years ago - a famous animal which could speak better than a three year old kid. It had a good vocabulary, more than five hundred words, and it could put together meaningful phrases. It could speak better than a chimpanzee. They use sign language of course. This was one smart bird. If you think about a bird, it has no brain, a bird. It's got a brain about this big. I know a bird isn't very big, and that actually makes a difference. The fact that that much intelligence could be compacted in that small of an area, means as far as I'm concerned, that we don't really understand very much about how the brain works. We do understand some things, and most of the things we understand have actually been discovered by animal experimentalists. Which is a useful thing to know. Because of course there are a lot of people who think that animal experimentation isn't a good idea, or that we could substitute computer models - which is a spectacularly idiotic theory. Obviously if we had accurate computer models we wouldn't need to do the animal experimentation. We're not going to build a computer model that's better than our current understanding, at least not yet; we may in the future. Anyways you can think of the basic structures that are producing these little sub-personalities as the output of fundamental biological systems. They're either motivations or emotions. The structure that appears to be most responsible for this sort of thing, at least initially, is the hypothalamus. I should show you a little bit about the hypothalamus. Just so you kind of have a sense of what it is. It's not very big, and you'll see in this diagram that it sits right on top of the spinal cord and the base part of the brain. That's just that little bitty area there. It looks from the diagram it seems to be about one percent of the entire brain mass or something like that. I think I mentioned to you before that if you take a cat and you take all of its brain off, except for the hypothalamus, roughly speaking, as long as it's a female cat in a restrictive environment, it can pretty much live a cat life; except that it's hyper-exploratory. Which I do think is quite remarkable, because you'd think that it would just lay there passively, since it doesn't have a brain. The hypothalamus, I'll show you some more pictures here of the hypothalamus, this is a rat hypothalamus, and this is a diagram from Larry Swanson, who's a real genius, and well-worth reading, although very complicated. He's a developmental neuro-anatomist, if I remember correctly, and he's interested in how the brain unfolds across the course of fetal development in all sorts of different animals. Assuming by doing that in part, you can track the evolution, but you can also understand the relationship between one brain part and another. What you see here, you see all of these little sub-units of the hypothalamus, they're indicated in orange, green and black, and so the first thing that you can see is the hypothalamus is not one thing, it's a bunch of ganglia, I think is the correct name for the hypothalamic sub-organs. So, it's called a hypothalamus sort of for convenience sake, you can identify it anatomically and it might be a good short-hand for a rough description of the macrostructure of the brain, but of course the problem with the brain is, you know, it's pattern one at this level and it's pattern two at this level, and it's pattern three at this level. You can go a long ways down before you run out of complexity. A cell is an unbelievably complicated thing, and you have, God only knows how many of those things you have in your brain. I don't remember exactly what the latest estimates are, but it's in the hundreds of billions. Each of those cells is as complex as really complex factory, and it's full of these little molecular machines and they're doing things that are so complicated and amazing, you just can't believe it when you - I've seen computer animations of some of these structures in operation, and the complexity of what they do to take the DNA molecule apart, and then to rebuild it little bit by little bit, and to do error correction at the same time, it just boggles the mind. I cannot see how you can possibly account for that using a straight, sort of Newtonian deterministic model of clock ward behavior; the stuff is so sophisticated. It looks more like advanced robotics than it does the interaction of tiny little molecules. There are molecules that work with the DNA that can walk, and as they walk they carry other molecules, and not only can they walk, they can walk over obstacles. They're like made out of ten molecules! What's going on? It's just beyond belief. Okay, so all of these little nuclei in the hypothalamus, they're all doing slightly different things, they're radically different things, although they have commonality in function. So, roughly what you could say is that one half of the hypothalamus is devoted to popping up little sub-personalities that are devoted to the satisfaction of fundamental biological requirements. It's not obvious what a fundamental biological requirement is, because that's a heuristic, it's not a category, it's a fuzzy category, but we can agree on some of its contents. So of course thirst, hunger and the need to breathe would be in there, and might also add pain, and sexual desire and the need for play, although that's a separate circuit and it's not mediated by hypothalamic structures, there's a different circuit for play. Play slash affiliation. Roughly speaking what an animal basically chases and requires on a day-today and week-to-week basis is mediated in large part by the hypothalamus. And the hypothalamus is also a crucial nexus in the brain for identifying what's going on in the body and then telling the brain what to do about it. So for example the hypothalamus is the thing that makes you hungry and the thing that makes you thirsty. It does that because it monitors levels of substances such as sugar in your bloodstream, and also the degree to which you're hydrated. You can sustain tiny little bits of damage to the hypothalamus, which has unbelievably extreme consequences. So for example, if you get unlucky, you can develop hyper aphasia or, uncontrollable thirst. If that part of your hypothalamus is damaged, people just can't keep you away from water supplies, you'll just drink and drink and drink and drink until you drown. You can't control it. So the hypothalamus is no joke and hyperphagia is the same thing, except in relationship to food. There have been reports of people who developed- I knew a guy in Montreal, who used to work at Harvard. His name was Frank Irvin. He did some of the earliest studies in the world on the physiology of violent crime. Frank had identified the role of epilepsy as a progenator to violent crimes. The defense rage circuit is part of the hypothalamus and if you're unlucky you can have a particular form of epilepsy that will activate the defense rage system. I knew someone who had a seizure condition like that. Then they get uncontrollably aggressive. Now this guy has quite an interesting story. So it first happened to him when he was about eighteen. He was out drinking in a bar. Now, alcohol lowers your seizure threshold. So he's out drinking in a bar and all of a sudden he got up and tore his shirt off. He was in an aggressive stance and backed into the corner, and his friends were coming towards him. He told them to go away or I'll hit you. Now he was a very well socialized person, so I think what happened is he went into this defensive rage state, but because he was so well socialized, he could tell people to stay away from him, but he couldn't stop himself from hitting them and attacking them if they got close enough. So anyways, I believe at that point he slapped a police officer who came to rescue him. They took him to the hospital and on the way there he hit his fingers against the hood of the car and put dents in it, and then when he got to the hospital - now I don't remember the particulars of this - but he picked up a kidney bowl, which is like an enamel covered steel bowl, and twisted it in a figure eight. It's like, try that, it's not so easy. The next time it happened he was in another bar, so what the hypothesis was then, was that someone had spiked his alcohol with some sort of drug, but that was never demonstrated. He got off of all that because he had no record, he was a perfectly peaceful person. Then the next time it happened he was in another bar, and he did the same thing. He backed into the corner and he ripped off his shirt, and he told me that when he was looking, he looked down the hallway and all he could see was fire. A policewoman came to get him, because the bar called the police, and he hit her. Then after that he had EEG testing, which showed that he was susceptible to seizures so he swore off alcohol. He never had another drink and he's like thirty-five now. He never had another drink in his life and it never happened again. It's just a good example of - there was a kid at the University of Texas, at Austin, about thirty years ago, who seemed to have a perfectly reasonable family life and so far, a reasonable upbringing, and he started to become increasingly violent in his fantasies. He climbed up onto the tower, because there's a high tower at the University of Texas at Austin, and he took at high-powered rifle and I think he shot sixteen people before they finally got him. When they did an autopsy, they found he had a high-pressing tumor that was growing on the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is no joke. For those of you who's introduction to neuropsychology has made you assume that the cortex is in control, let me tell you, the cortex is only in control when all of your other basic requirements are satiated. Since you're a modern person, and you live in luxury, that's unparalleled in the history of the world, all of your fundamental biological sub-personalities are always satiated. That's what you think you're like. You're only like that because you've never been anywhere where you weren't like that. So anyways, here's one of the things that's cool about the hypothalamus. The first thing is that you have these different sub-systems, these different nuclei that are responsible for these different sub-personalities. Oriented towards sexuality, oriented towards hunger, oriented towards thirst, oriented towards temperature regulation, etc. I think of them as sub-personalities because they have a viewpoint, they want something and they want to go somewhere, they want to accomplish it efficiently, and they have emotions that go along with it so, you know, if you're going for some water and you drop your glass, or somebody gets in your way, or the tap isn't working, you're going to feel frustration, anxiety and irritation. They come fulyl equipped with emotions, they have their own motor outputs, so they basically prime, and those would be the motor outputs that are aggregations of habits that you have been able to learn that have aided you previously in your water-searching behavior. So for us, that would be getting a glass out of the cupboard, which is a gripping issue, and a transport issue, and then you have to turn on the tap. Luria, who's a famous Russian psychologist called those things Kinetic Melodies. If you think about it from a Piagetian perspective and a Lurian perspective at the same time, you think how Piaget talked about how children put together basic - they're not reflexes exactly, they're complex sequences of what started as reflexes. Then those can be linked together in a sort of dance that you're always doing with your body. Each of those little dances, you think water-seeking, you're going to have a set of water relevant dances that you can do that your experiences taught you to become an expert at. When you get thirsty those are likely disinhibited. That's my guess, they're disinhibited and prepared for execution. Then the specifics of the circumstance that you're in will determine which ones are disinhibited enough to actually run. It's like you're full of little machines and they're all on. They're ready to go, but they're all held in stasis in some sense by some cortical inhibition. I like to think of the brain sort of like a nuclear reactor. The core is really active, it's on, but then you have all of these rods going into the core to keep it from going critical. The cortex is sort of like that in relationship to the lower parts of the brain. Those parts of the brain, man, they're alive. They're like the Titans of mythology. They're sitting down there, these fundamental forces and they're ready to leap into action at a moment's notice. But the cortex basically keeps them inhibited, and it seems to do that - so imagine that you have a vision of your desired future. Then a vision of the transformation stages that you're going to undertake to move from where you are to that desired future. Then what you're doing is you're comparing your interpretation of the present to your interpretation of the desired future. As long as those two things match, which the hippocampus is the thing that's determining that, it's the thing that's computing the match between your fantasy of what you want to happen with your fantasy about what is happening. As long as that matches then the hippocampus basically, now we don't know exactly how this works, although it seems to work to some degree through modulation of the reticular activating system - if the hippocampus matches what you want with what's happening, then all these other little sub-systems basically turn off. If the hippocampus detects a mismatch, which is when novelty occurs - something went wrong, then you get disinhibition of the reticular activating system. It's like you wake up, and then everything is primed for action. That solves the problem of what you should do when you don't know what to do. The answer is, you should get ready to do everything. You should be on alert and ready to implement whatever actions - it's not even whatever actions, it's more like you should be ready to implement whatever sub-personalities the situation seems to call for, as soon as you're able to identify what they are. Otherwise it's sort of like an army that's on alert. You don't know who's going to be called on, but everybody should be ready. That's a high stress situation. Okay, so part of the hypothalamus, let's say for the sake of argument, it's popping up all of these little sub-personalities that have to do with basic instincts. The words are all wrong because they're not - an instinct sounds like a drive and people aren't driven. We're not that simple, we're much more flexible than that. Even rats aren't driven. There's a very seminal experiment that was done at the height of behaviorism. So the idea with behaviorists, perfectly smart idea, was that the way a rat learned was, it would start with a reflex, sort of in the Piagetian sense, and then you could teach it a new routine which was an aggregation of little, tiny reflexes, you could teach it a new routine by rewarding it. So let's say, here's what you do with a rat: so you want to teach the rat to climb the ladder and go across it. So the rat's sniffing around in the little rat cage. Then it gets close to the ladder, so you give it a food pellet. Then it hangs around close to the ladder. It's because you've reinforced the manifestation of those micro-behaviors that are associated with the ladder. Then maybe at some point the rat puts a little paw up on the first rung, so you give it a food pellet. Then the rat is going like this very frequently. Then the next thing that happens is it puts two paws up there, and you know if you're patient, using reward you can get that damn rat to do damn near anything. Skinner taught pigeons to navigate guided missiles by maps in the Second World War, by pecking. They never did use them, but really that's pretty impressive. You think pigeons are stupid, they're not stupid they can read maps, which is pretty damn amazing. So the idea was is what the animal is doing is chaining together deterministic reflexes. The thing about a deterministic reflex is that it's not flexible right? If it's a deterministic reflex, it really is a drive. Action A initiates Action B, which initiates Action C and it's a fixed action pattern. Some animals do seem to learn that way. There are these little animals. I think they're moles that do this, it's shrews. Let's say you teach a shrew to go from point A to B by a very inefficient maze-like route. But the shrew could just walk straight there, but once he learns to do this, but he can't figure out that he's going from here to here. Whereas if you train a rat to do this the rat will figure out, to hell with all of this circuitousness, it's just going to go straight from point a to point b. that finding was part of what indicated to early neuro-psychological researchers that animals produced a map of the environment. In some sense what we're talking about when we're talking about these structures, the A to B structure, is a map. That's another way you can look at it. So you've got this rat and it's behaviors are all chained together. So I already told you, I spoiled the story in some sense, because I told you that the rat could learn to take a short cut. One of the earlier demonstrations of the independence of rat learning from the reflex of conditioning was that - so let's say you've trained a rat to run down a maze. Okay so hypothetically it's using it's front legs and it's back legs and it's learned to chain all of that together. "Front leg, back leg, movement, turn left. Front let, back leg, movement, turn right. Etc." so then, what if you put the rat, you tie up it's back legs and you put him in a little rat wheel barrel, so it's got wheels instead of legs - it's like the rat zooms through the maze. So much for the reflex theory because obviously you didn't train the rat to use a cart with it's rear-end stuck in it, it figured that out all by itself. So anyways there is a system in you that allows you to chain reflexes together. It's a very primordial reflex system and the behaviorists got that right. It's fast, very very fast, because it requires few neural connections. So there are some advantages to simple learning but once you get up to even the moderately higher cortical and sub-cortical functions, you're past the point of mere reflex chaining. Okay so, let's for the sake of simplicity the hypothalamus says, you need water. So you're current state is that you're thirsty and you're desired state is you get to go to the tap. You can feel your mouth dry and so forth, and some fantasies of drinking water start to come to your mind, and then all of sudden you're kind of possessed by that. So it's starting to interfere with your conscious goal-directed behavior at that point, and finally it's insistent enough like something knocking at the door so you think, man I'm thirsty. Maybe you enough think that you'll work better if you have something to drink. So you go off to the fountain, and what your hippocampus is doing - you've got this little idea, which is your desired future which is about how this trip is supposed to go, and then you're watching to see how the trip is actually going, but that's an interpretation too. If there's a match between the two then the hippocampus just leaves you the hell alone and you don't get anxious, you don't get knocked off the track. You go there, you have the water, that satiates that system, that's a form of reward it's called consumeratory reward, and then that systems disappears. It goes back to the dungeons from which it emerged and in all likelihood another one pops up. Now, it's an oversimplification of human behavior to assume that you just go from one hypothalamically mediated state to another, although I would say that's what two-year olds do. In some sense, that's what animals do. The two-year old's doing it because that little creature hasn't gotten any more organized than hypothalamic. You can see this if you watch two year olds. It's like they're laughing and then they're crying. Then they're hungry and then they're hot and then they need to go to the bathroom and then they want to play. It's just one, pure, motivated or emotional state after another. It's quite fun to watch. They're also relatively hyper-exploratory and playful. They're cycling through those things all of the time. So you can't say that that's really what an adult human does. The reason for that is that the problem with the pure - the reason you need a cortex and other sub-cortical structures that aren't hypothalamic is because the world is too complex for those primordial systems to solve the problems they're supposed to solve A, in every possible situation, and B, across multiple time frames, and C, in an environment that consists of the interactions between other very complex beings. So it's almost like an arm's race of complexity in some sense that's driven our evolution - the smarter you get in some sense the more variable you get. That's a problem because as I got smarter, say over the course of evolution, well you people got smarter too. We're all competing and cooperating with each other, so the whole damn system is getting more and more complex. You have to grow a brain in order to manage that at least, or you keep it simple - well, we didn't keep it simple. So we decided to grow a brain instead. I don't know if you know this but you've looked at a chimpanzee - they don't look a lot like human beings. There are obviously some things in common, their hands are quite human and their ears are quite human, but their forehead comes down to about here, and they're kind of shaped like this. They've got a huge, round body, and whereas a human being is sort of like a stick with two sticks coming out of it, and two more sticks - we're really, really thin, hardly any gut. Whereas a chimpanzee, it's intestinal structures are way, way, way longer than ours. So it has to pack that into this huge gut. A damn chimpanzee sits around for eight hours a day chewing. The reason for that is it eats leaves. You go out into the forest and see how many damn leaves you have to eat before you feel full. All the chimp does is sit there and chew leaves. Then it has this huge gut so it can extract some nourishment out of it. We figured out how to solve that problem once we discovered fire and hunting, because we could cook things. That enabled us, at least in principle, to trade gut for brain, which I think was a pretty useful trade, all things considered, although it still might get us into trouble. The brain's a very energy-hungry organ. We eat very, very efficient food and it turns out that cooked food is much more nutritious from a caloric perspective than raw food. You can afford to sit around and develop a brain if you've got high-quality food. Otherwise you're out there in the jungle chewing on leaves like an idiot, it's just about as bad as pandas. Do you know why those things are damn near extinct? They used to be carnivores but all they eat is bamboo shoots now. That's it, nothing else, bamboo shoots. They have no nutrition so they have to eat bamboo shoots all day. Now and then the bamboo crop fails and there aren't any shoots. It's like, so much for the pandas. If an animal ever deserved to go extinct it was definitely the panda. Hunt something, the lazy bastards! Anyways, now I discovered this about the hypothalamus when I was ready Larry Swanson, it just bloody-well blew me away, you'll see why, at least in part. Half of the hypothalamus, roughly speaking, is sort of devoted to popping up these basic, primal sub-personalities; the sorts of things that you share with animals. Then you might say, what happens when one of those doesn't work? The answer is, well you get an anxiety response. Now, the anxiety response is not mediated by the hypothalamus, and neither is pain. So, if you're an idiot your body hurts you or tells you or scares you. What's interesting about that is the pain systems and the anxiety systems are not in the hypothalamus, they're separate systems. The pain system is old, old, old. It may be as old as the hypothalamus, it's way down there in your brain. But, the anxiety system is a lot newer and that kind of makes sense. You can imagine the primordial organisms really didn't stop until they ran into something that was hurting them." They couldn't think, "oh no, I might run into something that will hurt me. You can't think that roughly until you have an amygdala. The amygdala is responsible for lots of things, and all of these areas are interconnected. One of the things it seems to be responsible for, at least impart, is anxiety. When your hippocampus detects a mismatch between what you want to have happen and what is happening, it disinhibits the reticular activating system, and one of the things it activates is the anxiety system. The anxiety system says, "stop, you idiot, you don't know where you are or what you're doing and so you should quit before you get into trouble." We don't like that feeling very much, that freezes us, but it's better than pain. You feel anxiety so you don't have to feel pain. Pain seems to occur when you encounter a stimulus, let's say a situation, where the stimulus magnitude is sufficient to damage those parts of you that are encountering it - so too bright a light, too hot a flame, too cold a piece of metal, too hot food, whatever. If it's of sufficient magnitude to damage you, you get a pain response out of that. The pain response is supposed to teach the part of you that moves forward, not to do that again. The anxiety system responds to cues of pain. The pain system is pretty complicated as well. Frustration is a pain-like stimulus. Disappointment is a pain-like stimulus. Grief and loneliness are pain-like stimuli. Depression is probably a pain condition. So even though the pain system is quite primordial, it's grown up like a complex tree, and it consumes many different functions. It's still a very ancient system, whereas the amygdalian system, which is newer, you've developed over time to tell you what might hurt you so that you can avoid contacting it. You've got your hypothalamus and it's telling you - it's laying out these little sub-personalities that are helping you deal with the fundamental necessities of the word. The pain system is there to tell you when you have encountered a situation that's harmful, the anxiety system is there to tell you when you might going to encounter something harmful. That's the thing that's activated when there's a mismatch. The mismatch says you don't know where you are or where you're going, and so you might get hurt. The other thing that happens, roughly speaking, is that when the hippocampus disinhibits the reticular activating system that turns the other half of the hypothalamus on. This is quite cool because the other half of the hypothalamus is the place where the ventral tegmental area is located. The ventral tegmental area is the part of the brain where the dopaminergic tracks emerge, and those are the tracks that you use A, to explore, and B, to respond to cues of consumatory reward. So what that means in non-technical language is that when you encounter mismatch you get anxious, which is what you should do, you should stop, something's wrong. As long as nothing else happens that's painful or threatening, than that system starts to acclimatize, partly because you're looking around and thinking. People often talk about this as habituation. That's a stupid idea. It's habituation if you're a sea slug. It's not a habituation if you're a person, except that in very, very primordial reflex-like levels of the nervous system. At the higher order levels that we're talking about, it's learning. If you stop and you're anxious, what happens? Well, generally speaking, you start thinking, what the hell might be going on? You're running through all of these different theories and part of the way that works is that it's partly a consequence of state-dependent learning. If you're anxious you're going to be primed to remember situations that you were anxious in before. Why should you do that? The reason for that is that "things that make you anxious" is a category. It's actually a category. We tend to think of categories as something that exists in the objective world. That is not how your brain categorizes things. You have to learn that really painfully to make objective categorizations. As far as your natural nervous system is concerned all things that go "bump" in the night are the same thing. What is that? It's some bloody, horrible predatory, crocodilian, dragon-like, monster that hides under your bed and comes out and bites you when you're three. I just read a little paper today about this kind of cat that lived back when were still figuring out how to use spears. This was a particularly nasty kind of cat, and it preyed on us, roughly speaking. We didn't get eaten by too many cats because cats really can't bite through the skull. They could go for your neck but they didn't necessarily kill you. This cat had a mouth that fit right around your skull and it had two teeth that went in here and two teeth that went in here. It was a silent killer. There is evidence that even children are capable of recognizing the motion in pattern of a predatory cat, and one of the hypotheses is that we still have all of our primate ancestors that didn't get eaten by that particular cat. We're pretty damn good at detecting cats, at least of that type, and we seem to have conserved that ability at least to some degree. You think about a category, you might think well there's fish and there's birds and there's mammals and there's reptiles, those are Linnaean classifications, they're based in some sense on Evolutionary divergence. Where they're not, on morphology. Who cares about that? Things that eat you, that's a category. You need that category. The other category is also things that might eat you. So things that eat you, those are things that can hurt you and the things that might eat you are things you haven't classified yet, but might be dangerous. That's your brain's natural category; one of them. Then you might think well if that's the natural category, see that's the sort of thing that the guy that wrote An Ecological Approach on Vision Perception, he talked about as an affordance. An affordance is something who's meaning you instantly perceive. So you might say, "No, no, no, you see a cat." Then you infer that it might eat you. No, you see something that might eat you, and then you might be able to figure out that it's a cat. It's the "might eat you" that you see first, no the damn cat. This is a fascinating phenomenon because it suggests, like the Heidigerians proposed, that what you perceive first in the world is meanings and out of the meanings you extract objects. It's not the other way around. If you look at the way your brain is organized, that's how it works folks. The more primordial your brain system is, which means the more ancient it is, the more its perception is action predicated. So for example, if you hear a loud noise behind you and you startle, that's your response. So you're going into a crouch where it would be difficult for a tiger to bite your neck. You do that, man that's way before your thinking. It's before your perceiving, consciously. You're not getting images or sounds at that point. It's so quick. That's a category: things that make you go like this. That's a good category. The reason I'm making such a case about that category is because that's one of the mythological categories: Things that go bump in the night. One of the things that primordial people were trying to figure out is - you could think of any old animal as figuring out how to escape from a predator. That isn't what human beings wanted to figure out. Not once we were able to abstract. What we wanted to do instead was to figure out how to escape from the class of all things that could eat you; not just any particular old thing, but all of them at once. That's the advantage to categorization. Can we arrange things so that nothing could eat us? How do you go about doing that? Believe me, we've been working on that problem for a very, very long time. One of the answers we came up with, we'll get into this later, is the idea of sacrifice. Sacrifice is a very, very ancient idea. I'll just give you a bit of a preview. It took me like twenty years to figure this out. Human beings discovered sacrifice a long time ago. They acted it out before they understood it. We act out lots of things before we understand them. The idea is sort of well we can make a bargain with God. You might say, well what's God? We'll approach that problem later, it's a very complicated problem. One thing you could think of God as, is, God is the anthropomorphic representation of the entire social structure across time. You might say, well God will reward you if you behave properly. What does that mean? Imagine you could conceive of everyone that wasn't you as one metaperson. Imagine that that metaperson is God. You can make a deal with that thing. You can say if I behave properly that metabeing will respond positively to me in the future. It's true, right? You know that. If you make a promise to someone and you keep it, something good is likely going to happen to you in the future. So that's a God the Father derivation - it's far more complicated than that, but that's not a bad point. We kind of figured out that we could bargain with it across time and that would work. I read a really interesting paper by someone who's actually a former student of mine, Azim Shariff, and he analyzed the relationship between criminal behavior and belief in Hell across a whole set of countries. I don't know if it was an exhaustive analysis, correlational analysis. It's way more peaceful in countries where people believe in hell. You think should you believe in hell? Yes and no. Atheist arguments aside, we're not even going to bother with them because they're kind of moronic. The idea here is that there are certain action patterns that if you undertake, you will be viciously punished in the future. You try lying to everyone you meet and see how well you'll do in a twenty-year period. You're going to be in such trouble by the end of that twenty-year period that hell will be the only accurate way to describe where you're situated. So it's no joke these are real things and people came up with these ideas for a reason. Hell isn't only where other people put you if you're bad, it's a lot more profound a concept than that. That's not a bad start. Anyways, the sacrificial notion was something like we cannot do what we want to do right now and do something else, and that will make things better in the future. Think about that people. That's the most brilliant idea human beings ever came up with. There's this old story, which is probably not true, about how to catch a monkey. You get this jar that's got a pretty thin neck. Just big enough for a monkey to put its hand in, and you fill it with things monkeys like to eat. Let's say hard candy for the sake of argument. So you put that out there and the monkey goes and sticks its hand in and grabs a bunch of candy. It can't get its damn hand out because it's only big enough for it to put its hand in. so then you can just go and pick up the monkey. Well, what's the problem with the monkey? It can't sacrifice. It won't sacrifice its grip on the damn candy for its future existence. That's what your parents have been teaching you ever since you were little kids. Let go of the candy so that you can live. That's delay of gratification, right? That's contentiousness, that's the discovery of time and its relationship to the social environment. It's so brilliant. Part of what people were trying to figure out when they were developing these rituals of sacrifice is - okay, so you think about society as a meta-person, it's usually represented as male by the way, but not always, it depends on the circumstances. So what does this meta-person want? You have to try to figure that out. Part of what it wants is - don't eat all the damn grain today, save some for next year, right? Act as if the future exists as part of the social contact. God, that's such a discovery man. It's only people who figured that out. I mean squirrels have kind of got it in some sense because they store nuts, and squirrels are smart. They just kind of got the inkling of it. I think what squirrels do is they eat all of the nuts they can possibly eat right now, and then they store the rest of them. It wouldn't go hungry if you store nuts for the future, human beings will do that - don't eat the seed grain, right? Then you're going to die next year. Alright, so back to the hypothalamus. Now, you're doing something you want to do and you're tracking how that's going - both of those are hypotheses, by the way. All of a sudden something happens that you don't want to have happen, like you live in Flint, Michigan for example. So you decide to go have some water and it turns out that it's not water at all, it's led. I don't know if you guys know about that, but it's just the sort of thing that makes your jaw drop. The state is in big trouble - Michigan. So they appointed an auditor to control finances, I believe at the state level. It might have been only at the city level, but it doesn't matter. Let's say the state level. So the auditor was looking for ways to save money and one of the ways they decided to save money was to hook up Flint, Michigan's water supply to a river instead of to the great lake, which is what it's right beside. Turns out, since Flint was an industrial center forever, that the water's just full of led. So now they have something like fifty thousand led-poisoned people living in Flint, Michigan. That is not a good thing. Led lowers your IQ rapidly and it makes you violent. For the ten thousand dollars they saved they probably cost themselves half a million dollars per person. It wasn't actually that there was led in the water it was that the water was more acidic. Oh, it took the led out of the pipes, yeah, good point. Well I'm not here to complain about Michigan politicians, the point is, is that just because you think you're out for a drink of water that does not necessarily mean that's what's going on. That's why I said that you're comparing your vision of the future to what you think is going on right now. Now if you read the neuropsychologists like Vinagradova, Sokolov and Jeffrey Gray, they're basically behaviorists. So what they tell you is this - and this is different - what they tell you is you have this little expectancy map that's like the rat has of its surroundings - it's a spatio-temporal map. So when you're doing something, you expect a certain outcome, okay. What you compare that to is reality as it unfolds. So you could say, so you've got this map and then stimuli appear to you, and those are objectively real. No, that's wrong. It's wrong. It's interpretation everywhere. You think you know what's going on right now and you think you know what you want. The reason I'm making such a big deal out of this is because look, if you're a rat and you're going about your business and something you don't want happens, according to the Gray Behaviorist model, you have to revamp your expectancy map. According to the model that I'm proposing it's way worse than that, because you don't know where the damn error is. It might be in the map of what you want, not what you expect, that's a different thing, but it also might be in the map you have that's of the present. So it's not just the map that you have that's a prediction of your actions that's at fault, it could easily be the way you're construing the world right now. It could be error at any level of behavior and so what it means is when an anomaly occurs, it spreads doubt through the entire hierarchy that we were describing including the future, the present and even the past. You know this, you know this perfectly well. You can see it when you encounter complex anomaly. So a complex anomaly would be you have a long-term relationship and you get betrayed. So betrayed means you've trusted someone and they enticed you to do so, and then they exploit that trust and hurt you. For Dante, the betrayers were in the lowest circle of hell. So it's a particularly nasty thing to do to people. If you think about trust as the precondition for interpersonal relationships, which it is, then if someone acts towards you in a way that violates your trust in trust, then they've done you the worst disservice that someone could possibly be done. Okay, so you get betrayed. Alright so, bang! That's an anomaly. What does it imply? That's the wrong question. The right question is, what doesn't it imply? It implies that you just don't have the foggiest notion of what you're doing or what human beings are like. Especially if it's a particularly vicious betrayal, maybe you've been suckered by a psychopath, it's like, okay, update your model and account for that - good luck, especially if you're naive. The probability that you'll be able to reach down into the depths far enough to come up with a coherent explanation for why someone would do that is very, very low. What I've discovered in my clinical practice is that if you get betrayed badly enough, the only language that you can use to describe it is fundamentally religious. At some points of betrayal it's good versus evil. It's malevolence. It's the malevolence that really traumatizes people. It's the fact that that person was out to hurt you. What's a human being like when they're capable of that? It's an age-old question. I'll tell you something weird and interesting. There's this old idea in Genesis, one of the first ideas in Genesis, is that God made people a paradise to live in. Let's just be wild about this for a moment, and assume that your little model when it's going well is a little paradise, right? The world's turning out the way you want it to. There's a snake in there somewhere, and that means - well, why is there a snake? There's a bunch of things you're not paying attention to while you're going about your business, right? In fact, there are almost an infinite number of things that you're not paying attention to. The problem is that one of those infinite number of things that you're not paying attention to can shift on you all of a sudden. So there's always this snake in the garden. Then you have to figure out what to do with it. The thing is, if you interact with the snake you get more conscious. The problem with that is you lose your little paradise. Okay, well it's worse than that, because that story is really old. We have no idea how old it is. It's disseminated all over the world, or it emerged independently in different places, we don't really know. In any case it doesn't really matter. It's a fundamental enough story - tree plus snake plus people - that no matter where you go some people have tree snake stories. I think that's because we lived in trees for like thirty million years and we got eaten by an awful lot of snakes. So it's a story that really appeals to us. Every bloody science fiction movie you go to most of the time if the aliens are bad, they're always reptilian. You don't get furry little koala aliens that are chasing you around, it's like the one's an alien. A reptile inside a reptile, they're nasty beasts, and they come out inside of you even. Which is another symbolic idea. Okay, so you've always got the damn snake, and it's popping out all of the time, and there's nothing you can do about it except getting ready to deal with snakes, no getting rid of them. So that' the first lesson, you're not getting rid of the damn snakes. You better learn to deal with them. Then the next question is, what is the worst possible snake? One of the things that happened in Christianity, and this was influenced in part by Zoroastrianism, was the idea of almost an independent evil arose. In fact there was a branch of Christianity called Manichaeism, that construed the world as a battle between good and evil where good and evil had equal reality. They were in this eternal battle. Now that got wiped out by the standard Christian theory that evil was actually just the absence of good, which anyways you could have a big debate about that and people have for thousands of years. As Christianity developed, there's this weird mythology that grew up around the weird myth of Genesis. The weird mythology was that the snake in the Garden of Eden was also Satan, and that he's the king of all evil. Okay, what does that mean? It's pretty straight- forward. What's the worst predator? Well that's easy, the worst predator is a human being. The worst of all possible snakes is the most malevolent possible being. That's exactly right, and that's why that association was made. It's so interesting because it took people thousands of years to make that association. It wasn't really put together well until Milton formalized in Paradise Lost. We kind of observe this in action, that there were bad people. Okay, so bad is a category. What does bad entail? Mythologies of evil center in on what constitutes bad. Carnivorous might be one of the things; malevolent, out to hurt, right? Betrayal, lying, and all of the cardinal great sins. That's the worst snake. It's a psychologization of the idea of the predator. It's even more sophisticated than that, because one branch of that theory is that the worst predator is the evil force outside of you, but the next branch of that is that the worst predator is the evil force within you. Yeah, well that's when it gets really psychologized. You think, well is that superstition? Hey, that's not superstition boys and girls, it's a lot more intelligent than that. It's the most sophisticated theory of the way things work that we have and it's correct. Now what that means from a metaphysical perspective, we're not going to talk about that because we can, but we can certainly talk about what it means in practical Darwinian terms. You better know what's after you, and the worst thing that could possibly be after you is a fully motivated and completely malevolent human being. Skull-crushing cats be damned. All they want to do is eat you, they're not going to torture you; whereas if you fall into the hands of the wrong human being man, you could be in excruciating pain for the next twenty years. So people are very imaginative if they figure out how to hurt someone. They can keep it up for a long time, and they're fully motivated to do so under some conditions. So you really got to watch out for that. Alright so back to the hypothalamus. So when you have a mismatch between what you desire and what you're after, then the hippocampus says, "uh, we don't know where we are." That's what it says. You no longer know where you are. Okay, what should you do when you don't know where you are? You should stop moving. Then you should - well then what? You should prepare to do a lot of things. Okay, then what? Then you should explore. Well that's where the other half of the hypothalamus comes in; that dopamanergic circuit that mediates positive emotion, right? Almost all the positive emotion that you experience in your life, the kind you like, which is hope and curiosity and expectation and surprise and that's all mediated by the dopamanergic systems. It's a major-league contributor to the totality of your being, especially in a positive direction. That's rooted in the hypothalamus, so what that means is that, it's quite cool, you got your fundamental motivations, you know your basic biological motivations, "bang!" they fail, that's anxiety, that's a newer system, and exploration. That's an older system. That damn exploratory system has been there forever. Now if you look at classic hero mythology, which we're going to do in great detail, what you see is that the typical myth of humanity is we live in a place, we'll say. We have to live in a place, and the place is doing quite nicely, thank you very much. The Hobbits and Frodo. So you've got the little shire there, right? It's all peaceful, it's full of these little people who are a little on the arrogant side, they're kind of dopey, they have no idea what the hell's going on in the outside world, but they think that's okay, they think you know, peculiar people are concerned about that sort of thing. They've got their little happy paradise going, they live a long time, they eat a lot, they party a lot. Unbeknownst to them, which is a very interesting feature of the story, the only reason they have any peace at all is because they're descendants of old kings, continually patrolling the borders, right? Those are the striders. Aragorn, he's the member of the race of old kings who patrols the borders. Those are ancestral figures, it's like you can all sit here in your little happy paradise, but the only reason you can do it is because the sons of great kings have put borders around your kingdom. It's funny because in the Hobbit, the Hobbit's basically despise the Strider, they're very, very suspicious of him. He's kind of dirty and dusty and he looks like he's been banged around all over the world. He's sort of like a tramp. They don't know he's the son of a great king, good thing for them that he is, however. Okay, so then you've got the little shire, what happens? Evil things are stirring. What is it? Well, fundamentally it's a great dragon. Well that's a snake, except it's like a meta-snake. It's snake with fire. You can be sure that fire was not only one of our greatest allies, but one of our greatest enemies, especially when we lived on the blank in Africa. That thing would burn now and then. So, get the hell away from that. So anyways, one hobbit, who's woken up by a wizard - the wizard is the symbol for the self from the Jungian perspective. So there's one hobbit who's a little bit more creative and exploratory than the rest and everybody has a little respect for him but they think he's pretty damn peculiar. He decides that he's going to, under the tutelage of the wizard, he's going to go check out this dragon. So he leaves the borders and goes out into the unknown. Then the rest of it is an adventure and one of things that's very interesting, again from a Jungian perspective, is that, what does the Hobbit have to become in order to conquer the dragon? A thief. Now that's pretty weird, because you think hey man, this guy's out being a hero, so he should be a hero. No, he turns into a thief. Why? Well it's because if you're going to conquer a dragon you better be a hell of a lot tougher than you are naive. So, partly what happens is, for the hobbit to masker up the forces that are necessary for him to confront something that is that fundamental, he has to transcend the cowardess that he describes as morality. Okay, so Nietzsche for example, Nietzsche's often viewed as a critic of morality. That's not true. Nietzsche identifies morality with cowardess, but that's not what he does. What Nietzsche says is this: if you're too afraid to do something, so you won't do it, then you'll say that the reason you don't do it is because you're moral. That's not the reason. The reason is that you're too damn afraid to do it. You might want to, but you're too afraid. That doesn't make you moral. So what happens to the Hobbit, for example, once he gets outside of the kingdom, he has to develop a whole array of potentials that he never developed before, because they were either not necessary in his civilized place, or because they were forbidden as immoral by the cultural situation that he grew up in. You have to be touched by the snake in order to defeat the snake. Where else have you seen that motif? Harry Potter, right? Harry Potter's a strange character because he's not obedient, not at all. In fact, he's quite disobedient. He breaks the rules in the service of higher morality. The higher morality is that he faces down the dragon that paralyzes you, and he frees the virgin. That's what happens with Ginny - Virginia, Virgin, it's the retelling of Saint George and the dragon. And interesting enough, the reason that Harry Potter revivifies, is because Dumbledore's phoenix comes by and cries in his wounds. Well the phoenix is something that dies and is reborn and so the meta-myth underlying the second-volume of the harry potter series is that the part of you sustains you through an encounter with a dragon that paralyzes, is the part of you that can die and be reborn. What that means in a sense is if you're wrong about something, and you fall into a pit, then you should let go of what you're wrong about, so that something new can arise. So it's better to be the thing that transforms in response to catastrophe, than it is the thing that's static. That's another big discovery of people. We're agents of transformation, which is of course why kids are so bloody obsessed with magicians and wizards, which are agents of transformation. That's all embedded in the mythology, it's all acted out. Nobody understands this sort of thing to speak of. Certainly the kids don't, it just hits them. They can recognize the pattern. They know that there's something magical about them, even though they're living in a cupboard in a London suburb, where everything is boring and flat and under control. That's not the real world, and it's true, it's not. Is that why we have more patience for people, including criminals, who admit their crime and do their punishment and redeem themselves? Oh not only patience, we often have admiration for them. Oh yeah, how many movies feature attractive bad guy? Well or for that matter, attractive bad woman? It's because of the Nietzchian observation. The people who are good aren't good, they're just cowards. Whereas the guy who's bad, well at least he's not a coward. Well then you might say, well you know, yeah he could stop being a coward and also become a good guy, but that's often but not always the actual plot of the movie. That's the redemption of the bad guy. It's also what woman fantasize about in relationship to the beauty and the beast mythology. They don't want a coward. He's the guy that wants to be the friend. It's complete bullshit. The bad guys going to advance over that - but not a big enough advance because he's a bad guy. The best thing you want is a civilized bad guy. That's what you want. Well no wonder, because it's only a civilized bad guy that's going to be capable to be dealing with the dragons. It's right. Lloyd Axworthy, when he was the minister of Foreign Affairs for Canada, we know the massacres were going on in Yugoslavia. It was front-page news at one point. He said, "I don't have the imagination for that kind of evil." Oh well, that's really impressive mister minister of foreign affairs, did you ever read about the Holocaust? It's like, it's time to wake up a little bit! These things happen, but he said it as a moral claim. I just couldn't imagine that sort of thing happening. Well, you're a little on the naive said, aren't you? And parading that around as morality is not a reasonable thing to do when you also happen to be Minister of Foreign affairs. You should be looking out for the snakes all of the time. They're definitely out there, and Milosevic was definitely one of them. So if a naive person meets someone like that, the naive person loses. That's not good because there's lots of people like that and it would be better if they didn't win. So anyways, the fact that the exploratory circuitry is embedded into the hypothalamus way down there with lust and thirst and hunger, it's so great because it shows you how the mythology works. It basically says, okay, here's a bunch of things you're doing now and then they'll go wrong. You need a system to deal with things when they go wrong. What's the system? Well it might kill you, bang! You better have some pain and anxiety to protect you. You better figure out what it is. Okay, better have an exploratory system so that you can go out there and gather some more information. Well that's the human story: gather information in the face of danger. That's the human story. That's what we do. So that's the hero myth. The hero myth is redemptive, and that's because it is redemptive. That is what works, or at least what we've stated our being on. Who knows? Maybe all of this exploration will just get us in trouble. That's another part of genesis, right? Poke around and see what happens. Well you know you're doing that all of the time. You're in your little paradise, beedling away all happily, and then you just can't stop yourself from pulling on a thread somewhere. Then you find out, oh my God, then maybe that's when you get suspicious about your partner cheating on you. You think, maybe this person's cheating on me, and you can't leave it alone. You can't leave it alone, you got to go look at the snake. Turns out it's there! Down you go into the underworld. You might think, maybe the bliss of ignorance would have been better. Well, it's not like psychologist don't tell you that. All those positive illusion people, that's there whole shtick. It's better to be a little bit dumb about how things work, because otherwise there's no way you can be happy. That's an idiotic theory on two accounts. A, happy isn't the point, and B, dumb is not the goal. So it's so ignorant that it's actually corrupt. Which is really saying something, because you have to be pretty damn ignorant before you get to corrupt. So it's a hell of a thing to teach people. You have to delude yourself in a minor way otherwise you can't stand being alive. Oh my God, that's awful, that's really awful. Here's a different story, maybe you're tough enough to open your eyes. That'd be a much better story. It's possible too because people are really, really, really tough. It's just that they live in these little protected places and they never get out there and hammer themselves out against the world, so they never discover that they're tough. You might thing, well that's your opinion. Well no, it's not my damn opinion. We know that if you take someone who's naive and paralyzed by anxiety, and you put them in psychotherapy and you expose them to the things that they're afraid of and disgusted by and avoiding, that it isn't that they get less afraid, they get more confident. That's what generalizes. If you bring someone in who's got a mouse phobia and you treat the mouse phobia, then they're not as afraid of a bunch of other things. Why does that happen? They weren't afraid of the damn mouse, they're afraid of their own inadequacy. Then you teach them that they don't have to be afraid, and then they think , "hey, I don't have to be afraid." Then they're not afraid of a whole bunch of things. So you get generalization from behavioral exposure. There's no question about whether or not exposure to the things that you avoid is curative, it's the fundamental axiom of psychotherapy. That and figuring out what you're going to do with your future. Even in psychoanalysis it's face what threatens you. It's just that the psychoanalysts go after past traumas. It doesn't matter as far as your brain is concerned. A dangerous thing in the past is exactly the same thing as a dangerous thing in the present. It seems to be partly because the amygdala doesn't have any sense of time. it's interesting because one of the things Jung observed was that there's no time in the collective unconscious. It's like everything is an eternal now. So let's say you got traumatized when you were a kid, your amygdala grows; maybe you got bitten by a spider. You're afraid of that spider then and now and in the future. It's the same. It's outside of time. The hippocampus is the thing that's dealing with time. So, you know, if you really learn a lesson it's supposed to be timeless. You can still help people overcome their phobias, but you can't get their damn amygdala to shrink again. So, you can just get it back under control. Okay, so that's pretty cool. Then, we could say, let's go up a level or two. Well, let's look at the amygdala for a minute. Things about the amygdala have probably changed since I updated my knowledge, but it doesn't really matter because the fundamental systems I'm telling you about exist. They keep moving around in the brain because we don't know exactly how they work, but at a system level of description and using slightly vague neuropsychology, we can localize these sorts of things in the brain. Okay so the amygdala gets inputs from everywhere. Basically what it's looking for are things that might threaten you. You could say in a sense that the amygdala has an inbuilt sense of the monstress. Let me show you, this is a good time to show you a comic. This is a great comic. Someone stoned came up with this comic. They really did. I really like this comic because it shows you what's going on perfectly. Okay, so there are these hippies. They're all friends of this guy named Fat Freddie. They're basically useless hippies. They don't pay rent and all they do is smoke pot. Anyways, at one point they make a bunch of money on some cocaine deal and they buy this home out in the country. They think they're going to go out there and live in paradise, so they bring their cat along, which is Fat Freddie's cat who has his own adventures with cockroaches and so on. Anyways, if you've ever had a cat one thing you know about cats is they don't like to move. It makes them very upset and nervous, and if you put them in a new house they're not happy about it. The reason for that is you've blown their map, right? The cat will slink around in a new territory and map every single place and every hiding place, obsessively, until it knows what the hell's going on, and then it will finally relax. A cat in a new place is not a calm cat. A cat in a new place is a nervous cat, which is also an indication that you don't have to learn to be afraid. What you have to learn is how to be calm. That reverse the way that psychologists generally talk about anxiety, because they're all hobbits and they think that life is safe. So because they think that life is safe, you have to learn to be afraid. That's dopey. The natural condition is terror and curiosity. If you're really lucky now and then, you're somewhere safe enough so that you don't have to be afraid. That's tenuous and delicate. So what you have to learn is how not to be afraid. Not, how to be afraid. Anyways, they got the cat. So he's in his box and they take him out of the box and the cat thinks, "so this is the country." So the cat goes really low and starts sniffing, and that is what animals do when they first start exploring. Both of those things: they crouch down because that makes them less visible to predators, and they sniff. The reason they sniff is because most animals have their whole brains built around their sense of smell; unlike us, where most of our brain is built around vision. Anyways, the cat's slinking around there and it smells something that it doesn't know. It thinks, God only knows what this thing that I don't know is. It would freeze first and then it would hastily retreat. So now it's underneath the porch. One hippie says, "where'd the cat disappear now?" The other one says, "under the house." The cat's down there shaking, which is what cats do when they're freaked out like that, and it's got it's little fantasy going. You'd hide to if you smelled what I did. Then it imagines up this monster. A monster technically is the amalgamation of unrelated parts. So what's the monster? Well its got duck feet and bare arms and its got a skunk tail and its got kind of a wolf head, and its got antlers. You think, well that thing doesn't exist. That's wrong. That thing exists. In fact it's a really accurate representation of what's out there in the forest. Any one animal wouldn't look like that, but the set of all possible animals looks exactly like that. Then you might think, well what do you want first, when you're analyzing something? Do you want quick and dirty representation of what to be afraid of? Or do you want to hang around trying to figure out whether that thing has hooves and teeth? It's like no, you want a quick and dirty representation of just what might be lurking out there. That's intelligent hypothesizing. It's the kind of hypothesizing that would be evolutionary driven. Did you ever see the far side cartoon, Monster Snorkel? I love that cartoon. There's this little kid in his bed, it's dark and he's under cover. He's one of those ugly little kids that Gary Larson always drew. He's got this snorkel that you use for scuba diving. Snorkeling, not scuba diving. All that's sticking out from under the covers is his snorkel so that he can breathe. Of course in his imagination there's some reptilian dinosaur sitting beside his bed. Well, why? That's what he's hypothesizing. Why? Because that's what's in the dark. You can tell your kid, there's no monsters in the dark. Then you tell your kid to never talk to a stranger. Well get your story straight people. Really? It's so dopey. Yes there are monsters in the dark. What do you tell your kids? No, there's no such thing as monsters. First of all they're driven half crazy because they think what am I afraid of then? Second, you tell them all of the time that there are monsters in the dark. In fact you're probably more paranoid about the things than your damn kid is. So what do you tell them? There are monsters in the dark but you can probably handle them, especially with our help. Okay, so now I'll tell you a story. So my nephew, he was six, and he had night terrors. Night terrors are this strange phenomena where all of a sudden you wake up screaming. It's quite unpleasant. You might say, well why is this happening? The answer is that we really don't know but there was some instability in his household at that point. A, he was just going off to kindergarten, so that's a big transition. It's out of paradise and out into the world. B, his parents were in the throws of approaching divorce, so there was that sort of undercurrent in the house. You know what that's like. You walk into a house like that and you know something's up. It's like the air is frozen. It's probably something you can smell, I think. Whatever, it doesn't matter, but you can certainly tell. So anyways, he's waking up at night screaming away. He's a very verbal kid. During the day he's running around, I guess he was about four, not six. He's got this little night hat that he wears. It's a plastic night hat. So he zooms around with that all of the time, and he's got this plastic sword, and he zooms around with that too. So you think what's he up to? He's playing knight, which is kind of weird in a way. Because you'd think why would being a knight be attractive to a kid? We weren't knights for that long. Whatever, it doesn't really matter. He was running around playing knight. He goes to sleep and he puts his knight hat and is sword right beside his bed. So fine, I watch that. I'm watching what's going on with them and I'm figuring out what's going on in the house. His mom is worried because he's having night terrors. Yeah, it's horrible he wakes up screaming. So okay, nighttime comes. He wakes up screaming, we're all sitting at the breakfast table the next day. I said, did you dream about anything? He said, yeah! He got right into this dream and he said okay, this is what happened: I was out in a field and all of these little dwarfs were around me. They only came up to my knees but they had big beaks, they didn't have any arms, but they had big beaks. They were covered with hair and grease, so they were all greased down. There was a cross-shave at the top of their head, and wherever I went these beaked dwarfs would jump at me with their feet and bite me. They're everywhere! Everyone stops eating breakfast to look at this kid, thinking, wow no wonder why you're screaming man. Then he said, yeah, and it was worse than that because there was smoke and at the back of the dwarfs there was this dragon and the dragon was breathing out smoke and fire and the smoke and fire would turn into the dwarfs. Oh my God, what do you do about that? Wiping out some dwarfs, who cares, but the dragon will just breathe up some more. That's life man. I've got this excellent picture, let me show it to you because it's worth finding, even though it's going to interrupt my story a little bit. Well I'm not going to find it because it will take too long, but I'll tell you what it is. It's a Greek amphora. You know amphora, it's like a vase, and people used to keep wine in them. It's painted on like a cartoon, it's sort of black and white. It's got this hero, who I believe is Hercules. Hercules is facing this snake, and it's a really cool snake. So first of all it's tail is curled in a perfect circle. If you look at dragons and snakes in mythology, their tales are often curled in a circle. It means something like infinity. Then there are all these snakes - it's a hydra. It's a snake with eight heads. Then there's Hercules with his sword - well, what's the problem with the hydra? You cut off one head and eight more heads grow. Quit cutting off heads - it's a good piece of foreign policy advice for the middle east. The hydras keep growing. Okay, so cutting off heads isn't going to be of any utility. Here's what the story is saying: no matter how many problems you solve there's going to be a bunch more problems and it's even worse than that. If you have a problem and you solve it that's going to lead to more problems. So even the solution is a problem. That's the law of unexpected consequences. That's why automobiles have destroyed the atmosphere. Everybody thought an automobile is for getting from point A to point B. It turns out it's not. It's for turning the world's holes into jungles. We didn't know that. So that's an unexpected consequence. So anyways, the kid is faced with this horrible conundrum. What am I going to do? I've got these stupid dwarfs and then there's this dragon. So I said, what could you do about that? Now that's called a loaded question and it would be inadmissible in a court of law in a sense because it's a question - but it isn't because I'm telling him something. You could do something about that. Well that's a hell of a theory. Well yeah, I should just lay down and let the dwarfs eat me. No, no you could do something about it, I said. What could you do? Then he said, I'd put my hat on, I'd get my sword, then I'd go get my dad and we'd go up to the dragon. I would jump on his head and then I'd poke both his eyes out with my sword and then I'd go right down to his stomach to the place where the fire comes out and I'd cut a piece off of that and I'd use it as a shield. And I thought, "right on, kid! You got it." It was so cool because he had the whole thing, eh. That's why he was running around playing knight. He'd almost got it, and all I had to do was drop - there's this fifth chemical phenomena called a super-saturated solution. It's kind of cool. So if you take - water can only dissolve so much sugar until the sugar starts to crystallize out. If you really slowly cool down then water and you don't tap it there's no impurities. You can get the solution super saturated which means, weirdly enough, it holds more sugar than it can. It's like it forgets to crystallize or maybe it needs a little impurity or shock or something to get it going, but it's like it forgets to crystallize. So then if you take a little crystal of sugar and you drop it in, it's like it goes "sound" and instantly it's all crystals. So that's what happened to this kid: he was there, he was ready, he had to answer, and all I had to do was say you could do something about this and "poof!" instant hero myth. The cool thing is no more night terrors. So you get the picture, it's very, very cool. Alright so, back to our discussion. Now, alright so you've got the brain here. This is the brain as conceptualized by Alexander Luria, who was Russia's most famous neuropsychologist. So basically he said that there's a bunch of different ways you can divide up the brain. It depends on what you want, which is an interesting way of thinking about it. Because you might say well how should you divide up the world and the answer is it depends on what you want. It depends on some degree of the world, but it depends even more on what you want. So one of the things Luria said was if you go from the back to the front of the brain - the front's the grey part here - what you see is, roughly speaking, the back half of the brain does sensory processing, especially visual processing, and the front half of the brain does motor processing. Okay, and so if you look at the back of the brain the sensory unit there, you see there's an auditory area and a visual area. What's cool is those overlap to some degree. So there's some hypothesis that the place where the sensory systems overlap are the parts that are responsible for your experience of a unified perceptual field. So here's an example: imagine the visual cortex and the auditory cortex overlap in once place. Okay, so it would sort of be here, about there on the left side. That's the part you use for silent reading. Isn't that cool? It means your using your eyes as ears. The way you do that is you use the overlap between the visual and the auditory cortex. It's so cool, you can use your eyes as ears. So the senses aren't as separate as people think. I used to wear glasses and I couldn't hear what people were saying when I wasn't wearing them. The reason for that is I wasn't watching their lips. So a lot of what I was hearing in language processing was the expression on their face and the movement of their lips. I take off my glasses, and I'm deaf. So anyways, that's the sensory unit, half of the brain. Most of it's the visual cortex because we're visual creatures. The front half is the motor unit. Okay, why? Well because we proceed and act. So it's the part of the brain that's responsible for zipping you around. You've got voluntary action, right? You inhabit a nervous system that enables you to navigate your way around the world. We're navigators, fundamentally. We really are navigators. You know ants can navigate by the stars? Think about that. How the hell can an ant navigate by the stars? They figured that out by watching ants figure out how to get back, and then covering up the sky, and then the ants would wander around not knowing where they were going. Yeah there's lots of things we don't understand, I can tell you that. So anyways, the motor unit. You've got the motor strip. Now if you touch that with an electrode during brain surgery then people will either move or have the impulse to move and you can map out how the body is represented in the brain by touching that strip with an electrode, and that was done by Wilmer Penfield at the Montreal Neurological Institute. It was a major move forward in the understanding of the brain and he did that on epileptics before surgery, because he didn't want to take out parts of the brain that were necessary so he was trying to figure out what they were doing. So that's the part that enables you to act voluntarily, and in front of that there's the premotor strip. In front of that there's the prefrontal cortex. Now, what's cool is that the premotor strip and the prefrontal cortex grew out of the motor strip over the course of evolution. So then you might say, well why do we think? The answer isn't so that we can come up with accurate, objective representations of the world. The answer is, so that we can plan what to do. What you see, fundamentally, is that as you move forward in the brain you go from action to planning action. So by the time you get to the prefrontal cortex, let's say the dorsal-lateral prefrontal cortex, which is the part of the brain that you use for abstract thinking, what you're basically doing is conjuring up avatars of yourself in an imaginary world, running them as simulations in your imagination, and the collective imagination, that's what stories are, running the simulation until the end to see if you live or die. If you die then you don't implement the simulation. If you live and thrive then you do implement the situation. So - who was it - Carl Popper, philosopher of science said, the reason we think is so we can let our thoughts die instead of us. Right, that's smart. That also ties into the death and rebirth idea, right? Are you going to die, or are you going to let your avatars die? One way of thinking about that is that your current self is just an avatar. Now if you understand that, that means you also understand the relationship between the Jungian self and the ego. The ego is an avatar, the self is the thing. Now I don't know if you know this, but the word avatar is actually a theological term. It's from Sand script. An avatar is the form that a God takes on earth. It's pretty cool that that turned into the term for the thing you use in a video game. That's your little, disposable self. You throw it out there in the world and it can live or die, and you're back there like God just being eternal all along the way. So, that's a very, very weird thing. Anyways, even before we had video games we were doing that. We had fiction, we had stories, we had imagination, and it's decoupled from our motor systems. So we can implement these hypothetical instances of ourselves before we implement them. That's kind of how we fight Hydras. Okay, so you have eight snakes, what do you do about that? You have eight potential selves. You multiply potential selves just as fast as you multiply snakes. That's what evolution does, right? Let's say you've got a mongoose. Mongoose like to eat snakes, they're really good at it. They can eat cobras. Go Mongoose! So you think, well a mongoose gets killed by a cobra. Well that's not a very good mongoose but that doesn't matter because the mongoose are generating all sorts of mongoose, and one of them is going to be able to kill the snake. That's all that really matters. There's a very funny mouse that lives in the desert in Arizona. I like this mouse a lot, and it jumps. It's so cool, this mouse, it feeds on scorpions. How the hell did it learn to do that? Anyways, it has to teach its young to eat scorpions, and its quite immune from scorpion venom, which is quite helpful. Still it goes out - it's like you going out to wrestle a blank crocodile - it's like a scorpion is a big thing compared to a mouse. The mouse will hop on to the scorpion and they have this terrible fight, and finally the mouse tears it a part. Then it brings it back and feeds it to its mice babies. Do you know what it does then? It goes outside and howls at the moon like a wolf. It sounds like a mouse so it's really squeaky, but if you slow it down, you know, which is what you have to do if you want to, for example, hear mouse vocalizations, because they're often much higher than your threshold for hearing. Blank that, to hear a rat's laugh when you tickle them, you have to slow down their vocalizations because they laugh at ultrasonic frequencies, so you have to slow down your vocalizations to hear them laugh when you tickle them. Anyways, these damn mice go out in the desert at night, after eating a scorpion, and they howl at the moon. Go mice. So anyways, back to the brain here. There are all of these terrible monsters being generated. You generate avatars of yourself to cope with them, and generally used to have to evolve to do that, but human beings, being the smart creatures that we are, generated up an environment in the imagination and then populated it with imaginary representations of ourselves, and then tried those out. Then we implement the ones that we think are great. Then you might think, well we've been doing that for a very, very, very long time. then you might think, maybe we've figured out exactly what thing we should implement, then we might say well that's the savior figures in mythology. That's what they are. What else would they be? People have been trying to figure out what the hell we are forever. The fundamental question, what is reality made of, is not the fundamental question. The fundamental question is, how do you act in the world? That's a whole different way of thinking about the world, but I think, given that I'm a Darwinian, I think it's the fundamental question. You know, obviously, given what I've described to you so far, you can't fall in love too much with your current self. What if it's wrong? Then you should let that sucker die. Then you might think, well what part of you is it that doesn't die when your avatars die. Well that's what Jung called the self. Let's say you undergo a personality transformation. There's the old you, you're all naive and something comes along and just wallops you, bang! Into the underworld, you fall apart. Then, bang! There's a new you. Maybe a little battle weary, but wiser. Then you know that one gets walloped out and into the underworld and up you come again. Fine, what's constant across all of those transformations? That's the core element of the person. That's what Jung called the self. Brilliant, it's so smart.
Okay, so we divided up the brain one way. Now we're going to divide it up another way, so this is the brain from the top down. You know you have two hemispheres and you might think, "well why do you need two hemispheres?" Do know that Gazzaniga, who's a relatively famous neuropsychologist, studied split-brain patients. You know that your cortical hemispheres - your brain is united down in the sub-cortical areas. It's sort of stuck together, although you have twins of many of the sub-cortical structures. You have two hippoc8ampi and two amygdala for example - one on each side. At the top, the hemispheres are quite separate, but they're connected by the corpus callosum, which makes them communicate. It's kind of interesting because you wonder why they aren't all glued together. What it seems to indicate is that there's some utility of functional independence, combined with some utility of communication. So it might be like, "do you really want to be networked at the same time to everyone in the world?" No you don't, you want some narrow pathway so that only the important information comes through. So it's sort of like, maybe the right hemisphere's the one kind of computational device, and the left hemisphere is another kind of computational device - of course they're not computational devices, but you get the point. Only the important information - the processed information from the right hemisphere goes across. And only the processed information from the left hemisphere goes across. Something like that, whatever. If you have someone who's epileptic or that has a brain illness of some sort, it's usually epilepsy but not always, and you do surgery on them and cut the corpus callosum; what you find, weirdly enough, is that each hemisphere develops its own personality. This is other evidence, I would say, for the idea that what the brain does is produce personalities. You can keep paring the brain down, and what it's going to do is produce lower and lower resolution personalities all the way down to the bottom - they're just not as detailed. If you lost, say eighty percent of your cortex randomly, you'd sort of being like a thumbnail of yourself. So, you'd still be you, just not at the same detail. Here's an interesting idea from the Catholics, it kind of goes along with the avatar idea. So the Catholics had been wrestling for a long time with the question of how God could have fit himself in a human body- because you could imagine that could obsess Christians - this great, big God in an itty-bitty body, but God in there just bursts the boundaries. They have this idea called Kenosis, which means emptying. The idea is that God had to empty himself out before he could inhabit a human body, and it's very much like a thumbnail idea. Jung would have of course thought exactly, that the self was a thumbnail of God. He wouldn't put it that way, but definitely that's where his thinking was leading. So that's a pretty damn cool idea. Anyways, so I developed this before I read what I'm going to tell you, but it doesn't matter. I'm going to talk about it from another theorist's point of view. The guy I'm going to tell you about, his name is Elkhonon Goldberg. He's a neuropsychologist, and he was one of Luria's students who ended up in New York. Goldberg was obviously influenced by Luria and all the unknown, Grey, and all those people that I've already talked to you about. He was interested in why you have two hemispheres. Well, there's a bunch of things you can say, broadly speaking about the hemispheres, and I've written some of them down there. The right hemisphere - this is an idealized representation of a relatively highly lateralized right-handed male. The reason I'm saying that is men seem to be more lateralized than women, and the right-handed lateralization is the standard kind. The brain can be lateralized all sorts of ways. What you might say is that - there's a bunch of ways of looking at it. One way you can look at it is that your cortex gets colonized by underlying structures. Each underlying structure is likely to colonize a particular area. For example, when you are born and you wake up and you see, your eyes are going to colonize your visual cortex most likely. It's sort of adapted for that. If you don't have a visual cortex then your eyes will colonize something else. So the brain has proclivities towards a certain kind of structure, especially early in development, it's unbelievably plastic, and so brains can be organized and lateralized in a bunch of different ways. To simplify it, what you do is you kind of take, well let's take the most straight-forward and typical brain and talk about it as if it's the canonical brain. I think what you can say is, regardless of where these systems are localized, they exist. So it's an oversimplification - whatever, doesn't matter. What you've got with regards to your cortices is a quick and dirty cortex, that's the right hemisphere, and then you've got a long-term detailed cortex and that's the left hemisphere. The left hemisphere is specialized for language. Language cuts things up into little, tiny, bitty pieces. That's really useful if you're doing little, tiny, bitty things. You should be - precision, right? Pinpoint accuracy; but that takes a lot of time and a lot of computation. Whereas the right hemisphere says, "yeah, yeah, let's get to the bloody point." So it captures the thing in an image. So like the monster I showed you from the hippie cartoon, that's a right hemisphere thing. It's an image that represents a class of entities; which, of course, images do. There's this woman named - can't remember - autistic woman. She's developed paddle-handling facilities all across - "what's her name?" Student "Temple Grandin." Temple Grandin, yes a very cool person. Yes I saw Temple Grandin speak at the University of Arizona at the Consciousness Conference, and it was the funniest speech I've ever seen in my life. Not because it wasn't perfect - it was bloody perfect. She's a tough woman - she looks a like a cowboy, and she spent a lot of time with animals. She comes out on the stage in her cowboy outfit and she's unbelievably straightforward and without nuance - she's autistic, she's severely autistic. You know, her mother helped her a lot, she developed this thing that she would go inside to compress her and hold her - like a little machine and that would comfort her. Anyways, she turned herself into quite the person and she thinks, she thinks like an animal. This is why she can design cattle handling facilities, which are often slaughter houses, so that the cattle don't get all freaked out as they're on their way to their eventual demise. So one of the things she does, is she walks through where the cattle are going, and anything that bothers her, she assumes will bother a cow. So for example, if the cows are walking through this spiral as they're on their way to the slaughter-house and there's a coke can lying on the ground, all the cows will stop and look at the coke can - it's anomalous. Now, she talked a lot about how she thought and what she said was that she could not devise abstract representations. So she said, okay, imagine how a child draws a house. What is in that child's house? There's a triangle and a square on the left, and then there's another rectangle, and another parallelogram, and there's a door and two windows, right? Then there's a chimney with smoke coming out - which is quite cool, it's like why is that? Where's the smoke? You don't see that in modern houses, but kids still do that. And then there's a tree, and usually there's a sun, and then - house. You think, oh, isn't that cute, a simple drawing. That drawing is not simple. You've never seen a house that looks like that in your life. It looks nothing like a house. It's not a house, it's not a picture, it's a hieroglyph. It's a pre-linguistic representation. It's like the essential elements of "house." So you might say what the child has done is extracted out all those things that are common across all houses, and then represented that. It's not a drawing. Now if you take autistic people, sometimes, and you get them to draw, they'll start in one corner of the house, and what they'll draw is that house - with every damn brick in place. So there are autistic people, for example, who - they can look at a building and they can count every single window at one glance. Then, there's another guy in England who's really famous, and this guy is unbelievable. You take him up in a helicopter and show him a city that he's never seen, then he goes home and has a piece of paper, like as big as a wall, and he starts in one corner and he draws the entire city. He doesn't sketch it out - it's from the bottom up. That's autistic savant drawing. Often what happens is, it's very realistic looking. What happens if the autistic drawings of blank language is they stop being able to draw. That's because the abstraction interferes with the realism. It's really hard to draw a hand. The reason for that is if you draw a hand, you draw a hieroglyph of hand. This is what a hand looks like. You try to draw your hand and it's really strange. One of the really strange things about trying to draw your hand is that in order to draw it, you have to stop seeing it as if it's a hand. Then it pops out and you think, my God, that's the weirdest looking thing. It's like a tree root, you know, it's like a claw. You know if you look at your hand like that, it looks nothing like a hand. That's how a hand looks. What the hell's that? It's like some sort of spider, but you have to see it that way before you can draw it. So partly what happens is, is that your capacity for abstraction interferes with your ability to see detail, that's probably good - it's one of the ways that you simplify the world. Anyways, the right hemisphere looks like it's specialized for anomaly. The way I look at it is this: Okay, so you've got your hippocampus down there, and it's keeping track of the comparison between what you want and what you think is happening. "Bang!" Something emerges, and it's anomalous. You don't know what the hell's going on. So you freeze, that's the notoric representation. Then you start to feel anxious. Then the right hemisphere comes up with some pictures - what might this be? You can experience this at home, for your own enjoyment. Let's say you're home at two in the morning, it's dark and you're alone. Maybe you've watched a horror movie, so you're all nicely blank. You know and then you hear a noise in another room and that noise shouldn't be there. So you're going to go investigate, right? So let's say the door's just a little bit open, and it's dark in the room, and you have to put your hand in to turn on the light. You just watch what your imagination populates that room with when you do that. You know, it's like - guy with axe, snake, alligator, like whatever! You're right hemisphere is going: there may be one of this class of dangerous thing in there. What it's doing is it's basically coming up with a hypothesis: what sort of monster might be in there. You're all freaked out about that, even though you know - who knows what happened; nothing but something creaked, but you're all on edge because your brain doesn't work at night like it does during the day. Everyone knows that - wake up in the middle of the night, a manner of horrors go through your imagination, and that usually happens when you're asleep. You're asleep for that most of the time, but sometimes you wake up and you worry about everything. Anyways, so that's the right hemisphere - it's coming up with pictures of what might be there. They're generally monstrous pictures and the reason for that is, well it's obvious, what the reason for that is. You'll probably turn the light on and look anyways, even though you might sort of peer around the corner, and then when there's nothing you'll be embarrassed about how foolish you are. But you can see the instinctual behavior right there, and it's wise. You know, there's a low probability that something terrible is there. Low probability times infinitely equals large danger. So if there's a two percent chance that there's a killer in there, it pays to be a little on the tense side, because being killed really sucks. So you're primed to feel negative emotion more intensely, because you're so vulnerable. Anyways, that's kind of what the right hemisphere is up to - it does quick and dirty representations. It also does categorization, so it's not - it doesn't give you exactly realistic representations of what's there. What it does instead, is it gives you categorical representations. So you might say, "how should you represent an unknown danger?" You should use an amalgam of all known dangers to represent it. That is what it is in a sense, you know? That's why I talked to you about the category of "all dangerous things." So the Aboriginals in Australia have this category which is, "women, fire, and dangerous things." Well you think, well why are all of those things in that category? It's not that hard to figure out if you think about it, but it's also a category that you very frequently see, say in Disney cartoons. So the Wicked Queen, for example, in Sleeping Beauty - she's constantly bursting into flames and turning into a dragon and no one seems to object to that - it makes perfect sense that the Wicked Queen would turn into a fire-breathing dragon. It doesn't make any sense at all, although it does, but it's not a rational transformation. But because it's in keeping with an archetypal structure, everybody goes, "yeah, of course that's what she's going to do." It happens all of the time in Disney movies - like Ursula, remember her from the Little Mermaid? She's trying to keep her daughter from becoming conscious. Yeah, nice Mother doing that. She traps old Zeus - she squeezes his soul to death and traps him in the underworld. He's also - well, we won't get into that. Anyways, what happens to Ursula is when you finally get her irritated enough she grows into this huge, ship-destroying, storm monster that's part octopus - a giant octopus. You think, "well, that makes sense." Okay, it doesn't make a lot of sense, but it's a kind of hypothesis. Now that's a representation of Mother Nature - red and tooth and claw, and there's also a reason that's female - it's not female, it's feminine - it's actually a different thing. We'll get to that. So the right hemisphere, well it's specialized for anomaly - it does quick and dirt analysis under the influence of the limbic system. It's not linguistic, so I would say that it's still dominated by the sub-cortical systems. My suspicion is that animals are still dominated by the sub-cortical systems. Their brains work from the bottom up. We have a top down module. That's at least in part of the left hemisphere linguistic system. It's a new thing that people have, and it's based on our capacity to abstract, so that would partly be visual, like hieroglyphic, and then also to transform things into linguistic form. It seems to me that that's the part that we really identify as ourselves, right? It's weird - let's say you're home alone, and you get freaked out and all these images come to mind; do you think of those images as part of you? You think of them more as these things that appeared to you. That's what you think about your dreams. They're things that appeared to you - they're not you. Why would you think that? I mean, they're in your experiential space, so why is there that separation between you and your dream? "I had a dream." Not, "I thought up a dream." Or, "look what I created," it's like there you are, the observer, and up comes a dream. It's very, very weird. It shows you that there are forces operating in your psyche that are impersonal, genuinely impersonal. That's part of what you call the collective unconscious. It's the thing that generates these weird images and protects you. It's nature, that's for sure. It can be absolutely terrifying. People can have dreams that are so terrible - well like the one my little nephew had, that's pretty damn nasty; little greasy dwarf things with big beaks, that's a very ugly representation, and if that wasn't bad enough there had to be a fire-breathing dragon behind them, creating them endlessly. There's no bloody-wonder he was waking up screaming. It's like, "Oh no, I figured out what life is like." At four, that's pretty traumatic. So, okay, now the left hemisphere. This is Elkonon Goldberg's hypothesis. You get one hemisphere or system that operates when you know what you're doing and when what you want is happening. That's the happy-talky part that thinks it knows what-the-hell is going on. Then you have another part that only turns on when you don't know what's going on. It's full of anxiety and negative emotion. The right hemisphere, by the way, is specialized for negative emotion. If you sustain right, pre-frontal damage, you become inappropriately happy. You're full of positive illusions. You think, "well, that's an excellent thing." It's not - you make really impulsive risky decisions and your life goes directly to hell. You need the negative emotion, obviously. The reason you suffer with negative emotion is because if you didn't suffer with negative emotion, you'd suffer from being destroyed. Those are your options. There are people, by the way, who are born without pain. You think, "hey, that's a good deal." They never last past twenty, and part of the reason for that is - you don't notice this - but while you're sitting there, you're going like this all the time. The reason for that is that if you sit for any length of time on one part of your body, then it doesn't get much blood and it doesn't get oxygenated. You do that, it bitches a little bit, a little pain, so you shift. You shift and you shift, so you're just doing this all of the time. Otherwise you wear out your damn body and you get bed sores, or that sort of thing. These people that don't have any pain, they just wear themselves out. So you need the negative emotion, it keeps you going. It can get out of hand and have its own pathologies, but it's definitely necessary. So the right hemisphere does negative emotion. Inhibition of behavior - that's the freezing that's attended on anxiety. It does image processing, holistic thinking - so it's the quick and dirty hemisphere - pattern recognition, pattern generation and gross motor action. That's interesting too, because the gross motor action is, again, the quick and dirty stuff. If you need to slap something away, it doesn't really matter that it's a gross-motor gesture. You don't have to go like this, and be precise; it can just be fast and sloppy, and it will still work. Now the left hemisphere is specialized for when you know what-the-hell's going on and you can concentrate on the details. So then you can think about it in terms of the hierarchy that we discussed, right? So what it implies is that at the level of specific, fine, detailed motor output, the left hemisphere is operating. That's kind of associated with positive affect - I know exactly what I'm doing and I'm making minor adjustments and everything's going well. If you go up the hierarchy towards more and more abstracted representations then increasingly, that's moving over to right hemisphere space. So that's also partly why, when you disrupt those higher-order structures, literally all hell breaks loose. So, left hemispheres. Operation in explored territory - positive emotion, activation of behavior, so that's also exploration. Word processing, linear thinking, detail recognition, detail generation, and fine motor action. So you need one system that works when you don't know what's going on and you need another system that works when you do. Sometimes you're where you don't know what you're doing and sometimes you're where do know what you're doing. Now Ramachandran, who's a fairly famous neurologist, who operates out of LA, he associated the totalitarian ego with hyper domination of the left hemisphere. The reason he did that is very cool. So he's got these patients that have - what's it called, is it agnosia? It isn't, we'll call it neglect. Okay so this is what happens. You have a stroke and the stroke affects the back part of the right hemisphere, alright? So what happens? Your left side is paralyzed; you can't do anything with it. Okay, so, however you also don't notice that it's not working, so one of the things you might do if you do become aware - you're laying in bed, you've had a stroke and for some reason you notice that there's an arm lying in there with you. Then what you do is you try to pick it up with your other hand and you try to throw it out of the bed. When you find out that it's attached to you, because it's not your arm, you're not very happy - or maybe you throw yourself right out of bed. Then if someone gets you to draw a clock you draw half a clock and if you eat a plateful of food you eat half the plate, unless someone turns it - and then you eat half of that. So half the world is gone - it's hard to imagine what that would be like. I think what it's sort of like is - you know how there's a whole world behind you? You don't detect it as not there - it's not black or anything, like when your eyes are closed - it's just not there. I think what happens with people with neglect is that the "not there" becomes three quarters instead of just half. It's something like that anyways. You don't know what's going on and there you are like this and someone says to you, "I notice that you can't move your left arm today." What do you say? You say, "that's because I'm tired." Or, "I don't feel like moving it." And so forth, so you have this reason that you're not going to move it. You might say the same thing about the left foot, "yeah well I don't feel like moving it. " You'll have some story about why you're not going to move it. Okay so that's fine. Freudian's thought about that is traumatic denial. It was so overwhelming to you that you lost the left part of your body. You couldn't face it and you just denied it happened. It's not a bad theory, it's not quite right, but it's not a bad theory. I'll tell you a couple of related stories. Let's say you're on dialysis. That sucks. You have to have this big thing in your arm, it's like a shunt, and you have to go get hooked up to a dialysis machine like all the time. Your kidneys are failing and who wants that? Nobody, so everybody thinks: time for a kidney transplant, and then they're on a long waiting list and they get one kidney. That's not very many kidneys. Then they say, "okay, you got your kidney and everyone's thrilled about that, here's your anti-rejection medication, make sure you take it. Then a year later you lose your kidney, why? You don't take your damn anti-rejection medication, that's the most common reason. You might think, well why in the world would you not take your anti-rejection medication? The Freudians would say denial. Here's a different hypothesis: Your whole map of you is person with kidney. Then you lose your kidneys and it's like you're a whole, weird thing that you have no idea about. It's virtually impossible for you to update your model. You think, does that make any sense? Have you ever lost a tooth? Right. What does your tongue do for six months? You're sitting there and your tongue is fiddling away there like a mad dog investigating every teensy nook and cranny like it's an obsessive exploratory device. It does it even when you don't want it to. Then six months later you get your mouth remapped. That's just a tooth, man; lose a kidney and see what happens. Or lose the whole left side of you body, it's like, what are you going to do about that? Well, okay, then Ramachandran, he's testing these people for balance. What he does is he checks out this phenomena called nystagmus, and so if you pour cold water in someone's ear their eyes will move back and forth because it screws up the - you know you have a balance system in you, in ear your ear - and if you pour cold water in there it screws it up and then your eyes move back and forth. You know, it's not very pleasant. What he found was that if he poured cold water in the left ear, then all of a sudden the people would wake up and go, "Oh my God, I don't have the left side of my body," and then they'd have a catastrophic emotional experience and they'd be all upset about it crying away; which is of course what they should do. Twenty minutes later it would wear off and you'd say is there anything wrong with your left side and they'd say well yeah, I just don't feel like moving it. So what seems to have happened is something - so there's a body representation center in the back of the right hemisphere. You blow that sucker out with a stroke, and that means that you can't represent that part of your body anymore. Maybe there are tatters of it left; it's like a network that's damaged and under some conditions you can more or less get it to operate so you pour some cold water in the ear and you shock the whole system. Then there's enough neurological activity so the network kicks in, even though it's damaged for ten minutes, and then you get this tremendous burst of negative emotion - which is what the right hemisphere should be doing when you lose half of your body. You experience that when your left hemisphere is flapping away trying to account for this - which it can't, because it's such a massive, utter catastrophe. Then you know, the shock wears off and "bang!" the system shuts back down, and "poof!" you're back in denial. That's a good example of the relationship between the left hemisphere and the right hemisphere. The left hemisphere has a fixed idea about the world. So in some sense you might think about it as the instantiation of your latest avatar; you can certainly see that with people who are ideologically possessed. They've got this verbal system that accounts for the whole world and there's just no damn way that thing's going anywhere. It's got this totalitarian aspect because it wants to explain every last thing; it doesn't like anomaly at all. It hasn't come to terms with anomaly at all. There's no sense of transformation within the system, which is partly why totalitarian systems die. The Red Queen said to Alice in Wonderland when she was in the underworld, "in my kingdom you have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place." That's why totalitarian systems don't work. The damn environment keeps shifting around on them. If they're fixed in place, the gap between their theory and reality gets larger and larger and larger and larger until finally they fall into a pit; and that's the end of it. That's what happens to people too, if they don't stay updated. They let things get away on them; eventually the ignored reality comes flooding back, and we'll see that represented in mythology because it's represented very nicely in mythology. It's why often dragons in fairytales, for example, in the Saint George story, and in the Hobbit for that matter - the dragon is an eternal thing: it lives underneath the earth and most of the time it leaves you the hell alone. Now and then it comes back and it tries to destroy the city, and then you have to zip out there and fight the thing so you can get it to go back in its hole. Maybe you get the treasure that it's carrying, and then it's back in the hole for while; but that thing's coming back. It's always coming back, and so you build the walls and all that, that's fine. A dragon can destroy any walls. Walls aren't enough - you have to be prepared to go out there and fight the damn thing, and that's how you keep it at bay. That basically means you have to maintain everything that you build, it's something like that, right? Otherwise it falls apart with increasing entropy. Alright, so Goldberg thought about this as an anomaly system, a novelty system and a routinization system. I intended to think about it from more of an Anthropological or an Ethological perspective; thinking about an animal (us) in our natural environment. It's not so much novelty versus routinization, as it's explored versus unexplored territory. That's what the world's made out of - it's made out of explored versus unexplored territory. So there's a domain that you inhabit, which is the center of the universe, from a mythological perspective, with you right in the middle of it. Around you is this circle, which is your place, which you move around with you, and in that circle you know what-the-hell's going on. That's partly because you've mapped it, but it's also partly because you don't go outside of it. You have your friends and you have your routine and that's nested inside your culture, and you try and keep that thing from flipping upside down. You do that all sorts of way: partly by doing the same thing all the time, but also partly by refusing to go anywhere that might seriously challenge your beliefs. Fair enough, you can understand that, although it makes you weak to do that, because you're not as prepared as you might be. So you could say human beings are tribal, social animals that have a territory. Then you think, "well what's the territory?" Well let's say tree-dwelling chimp ancestors; the territory's the jungle. No, it's not. That's not the territory. The territory is a little bit of the jungle, plus the things that come in from the outside, plus the primate dominance hierarchy that exists in that area. So that's the territory, that's the environment. For mythological reasons we tend to make a separation between the environment and culture. Yes, it makes sense at one level of analysis, but at another level of analysis all it does is screw you up. You're territory, fundamentally, isn't the world; not the natural, objective world. You want to stay as far away from that thing as you possibly can. Your territory is that circle of people with whom you spend ninety percent of your time. If you're a chimp, for example, or some other kind of monkey, highly social, what do you do all day? You sleep, you eat, you chew leaves if you're a chimp, and you groom other chimps. It's constant social interaction, and you're jockeying for a position in the dominance hierarchy like mean girls in that movie, you know. You're mapping out the social territory knowing who's who, and what's what, and then trying to get up somewhere near the top. That's your environment, that's your environment, and so your world is that social, natural circle, which is a four-dimensional territory, because its got length, width and height - plus it stretches across time. So it's this transforming natural entity. Inside that there's a pyramid. The pyramid is made out of all the primates that you interact with. That's the world; circle with a pyramid on it. Now I'll give you a vision, this is a vision I had once when I was trying to figure this stuff out. Now what is the world? So imagine that there's a field in front of you that stretches as far as you can see. You're flying above it. What you see everywhere are these pyramids. Let's say for the sake of argument, that they're skyscrapers made out of glass. There are tears in them. You fly down and one's here and one's here, and some of them are really big and some of them are really small. They're just everywhere. You're flying around above them, and you fly close enough to look inside and what you see inside them are people all packed together, trying to scramble up to the top. That's the world, that's reality. The funny thing is, is that you can be in one of those pyramids clambering away to the top, or you can be flying above it - those are your options. If you have to choose, you should be flying above it. So the relationship between the self and the ego avatar is the same as the relationship between the thing that's flying above, and the thing that's within one of those pyramids trying to scramble to the top. You know, well you say well I'm going to get to the top. "Top of what?" There's a hundred tops, there's two hundred tops. Then you might say, "well is there anything above the top?" There is, there's the part of you that isn't entrapped within that particular system and that can move from place to place. If you look at Egyptian mythology: so you know you'll see if you look at the back of the American dollar bill, that's a symbol of value, right? Okay, so what's the pyramid? There's a pyramid on it, right? What's the top of a pyramid? It's a triangle, it's separate from the pyramid. There's an eye inside of it. That's because the top of the pyramid is an eye, and it's separate from the pyramid. What that means, fundamentally, is that the thing that transcends the structure is attention, voluntary attention. Now the Egyptians worshiped voluntary attention in the form of Horus, because he was a God. I'll tell you about Horus in detail. One of Horus' avatars was the falcon. The reason for that is falcons can really, really, really see. They fly around, and so they're like the king's eyes. Like the little bird Zazu in the Lion King. He was the king's eyes, the thing that flies around above. He was a particular enemy of Scar, remember Scar eats him at the beginning and then spits him out. The reason that the King's eyes is an enemy of scar is because the King's eyes can see what he is, right? He's the eternal force that works to disrupt the kingdom and bring everything into ruins. Classic myth, classic myth, partly accounting for why it was the largest selling, highest grossing cartoon in Disney history. They got the mythology pretty right. So you might say, "what's a human being like?" Remember I told you that when Penfield was mapping the brain he was poking people. You can either poke them along the sensory strip, which is - if the motor strip is here, the sensory strip is just behind it. The motor strip is where the motor systems of your body are represented in so far as you can control them. The sensory strip is where the sensory systems are represented in so far as you can feel them. So what this is, is a - the body is laid out weirdly on the motor cortex. One of the things that's pretty funny is that the genitalia area in the sensory cortex is right beside the feet. So I think that's why people have foot fetishes and love foot massages, is because they're spreading activation from the foot area to the genital area, and God only knows why that is. Maybe because you had to have had really sensitive feet to stomp around without stepping on really horrible things. So you can put this weird, stretched-out, body representation together in a representational form like this, they call that the homunculus, which is like a little-man that exists inside your brain. So what you see, that's the motor-homunculus, not the sensory-homunculus. So what do you see? Well what is a person as far as its brain is concerned? Well, hand - that's for sure. Thumb, that's for sure - your thumb is as representative of your whole body. It's because your torso is hardly represented at all. Why is that? How many things do you manipulate with your chest? None. You don't have motor control over it, so it's not represented. So, the hands man, those things, they're represented like mad. So are the face, and the lips and the tongue. There's a bunch of reasons for that: One is when you're an infant, you explore like mad with your mouth - but you do that your whole life because when you eat- you know what it's like. If you're eating something and there's a bit of sand in it, you find it and you take it out. You can detect this teeny, little thing that's not supposed to be in your mouth. Well that's a good thing because lots of things aren't supposed to be in your mouth. That's part of the reason. The other part of the reason is, well think about what you do with your tongue? There are a lot of things you do with your tongue: Some of them are eating, some of them are talking. Some of them are all sorts of intimate behaviors, that thing is wired up; and it's wired up right at birth. Then it's the same with your lips and the rest of your mouth, you use that to communicate. Your hands wander around, taking the world apart, and putting it back together, which is exactly what your brain does, and then you blab about what you're doing to everyone. That's basically a human being. I like to think of this thing as it's a comical representation of the hero that goes out to confront the world, right? The hero has two elements. One is explore, and that's where the west is powerful. We have a really well developed mythology of the exploratory hero. Where we're not so well developed is the second part. In the second part of the classic hero story, you're supposed to come back and communicate about what you've found. So if there's an individual exploration element, and then there's a communicate and update the culture element. Both of those are equally important an it's something we don't do well, we don't have much respect for tradition in the west, and it's a really, really big problem. The ethical responsibility of a human being is to take the dead culture, so that's the dead father, or the dead God, and to revivify it with attention and communication. If you fail to do that then everything disappears. We're failing to do that - we're leaving it all behind instead. It's not a good idea. You know if the old Gods die as Nietzsche said they had, new Gods swoop in very rapidly and if you thought the old God was bad, you wait until the new God gets a hold of you. So, well we saw what happened in the twentieth century, with all of the ideologies that sprang up in the absence of classical religious belief. Okay, you're not so thrilled with Catholicism, if you think about that as the fundamental tradition of the West. You know, with the witch burnings and the inquisition and all that. It's like yeah, yeah, get a load of the Nazis and then see what you think; or the Communists for that matter - from bad to worse in an unimaginable way. You know, and it's partly because those archaic systems, those archaic, religious systems, they weren't ideologies, they were a whole different class of thing. We don't understand them very well, and it's not good because you cannot live without understanding them. You don't know who you are. Then you fall prey to weird mental diseases, like Nihilism, that's one. The other one is ideological possession - so you become a Totalitarian or a Nihilist. That's a bad outcome. You might think, "well, what's the alternative?" Well, you know what happens in Pinocchio, right? You've watched Pinocchio? Okay, I often show Pinocchio to this class, but I don't know if I'm going to do that this year. Anyways, Pinocchio, he's a puppet, a marionette. Someone else is pulling his strings. He has a wooden head. He's not very bright. He hasn't banged the world at all. He's got a good father, the old Geppetto, who would really rather that he was a real boy, a real person. So he's the kind of father that wants to produce an individual, not a slave. That's why in his workshop it's all friendly and there's a nice fire, and he's making toys and there's lots of music, it's like "Go Geppetto!" he's a good guy. He makes this little puppet and he sends him out in the world. He says, "go be a real boy." Well, Pinocchio runs into a whole class of different obstacles; one is evil, that's the Coachman, and the Italian stereotype guy who makes him a dancing puppet celebrity. I think that's pretty funny, that's really prescient. You might think well what's the goal of your typical bone-headed, mid-adolescent in North America - unearned celebrity. Well that's exactly what Pinocchio goes for first. That doesn't work out so well because he ends up a slave and then the next thing that happens is he capitalizes on the fact that he's vulnerable, and pretends he's sick and goes off for a vacation, under the direction of the Coachman (who's basically Satan in disguise). Then he goes out to treasure island and meets all of the delinquents who are just like Nazis, and turns out in fact the whole ploy is to enslave everyone, to deprive them of their voice - that's the donkey's breying - and to make them into slaves. Pretty damn horrifying and that movie came out around the time that the Nazis were really grasping power in central Europe. They got it exactly right. Here's what's really going on behind the scenes. Then what happens is Pinocchio turns halfway into a braying donkey. He's gone off the path and in order to get back on it he tries to go home. It's too late, he can't go home, because he's not a kid anymore. He goes home and Dad isn't there, surprise, surprise. Once you grow up and you go home, Dad isn't there - it's just another human being. So then what happens is he has to go into the ocean. Well that's particularly weird, right? There he is, half donkey, he's a puppet, the dove comes down and drops him a message from God. It's like the Holy Spirit descending, except it's from the blue fairy, weirdly enough. The message says you have to go to the deepest part of the ocean and rescue your father. Yeah that is what you have to do if you don't want to be a bloody, puppet donkey. You have to go down into the depths and find your dead Father and you have to revivify him. That's what happens. So Pinocchio goes way down there into the deepest depths and finds Monstro, who's a monster so terrible that the fish swim away at the sound of his voice. Just like, "he who shall not be named - Voldemort." You can't even say his damn name. Same with Monstro. Pinocchio goes down there, he goes into the whale, what happens? Geppetto says there's no getting out of this, there's no getting out of this. We just have to sit here and cook fish and Pinocchio thinks, "cook!" He starts breaking up all the chairs and everything and his Father is freaking out, "what are you doing breaking all of these chairs? What are we going to sit out?" Pinocchio lights them on fire. He's a master of fire. It's a Shemanic ritual. He is a master of fire and that's what human being is. He gets everything burning, of course Geppetto's all freaked out about that because what are the going to sit on, and Pinocchio thinks, "who cares about sitting? We're going to solve the problem once and for all." Then the whale turns into a fire-breathing dragon, which is pretty damn weird thing for a whale to do. He half-kills Pinocchio, he washes up on shore dead, but he saves his father. Then at the very end of the movie he's lying on his bed, all drowned. So he's a dead puppet now. Do you want to be a live puppet or a dead puppet? Well the maybe the dead puppet is better than the live puppet, it depends on where your going. Then he's on the bed, and the blue fairy comes down and says well you've been honest and courageous, "bang!" now you're real. Then they have a little part, and that's just exactly right, they got that exactly right. That's part of the hero mythology, it's the rescuing of the father. Student: Why do you have to rescue the father? Otherwise you're a corpse. You're a historical creature, you're a cultural creature. You cannot live without your culture. You think you can, but you can't. it disappears, and look, I'll give an example. In the Mesopotamian creation myth, which I'm going to tell you about next week, one of the things that happens is that the first round of Gods, so they're like primordial forces, they're pretty damn careless, and they kill their father. They make this place to live on his corpse. That's where we live, we live on the corpse of our ancestors. We live in the society, it's dead, it's the product of dead people. It's got this dead element, but we're living on it. They're very careless, they kill it, so they render it completely dead. Well what happens is Tiamat, who's the Mother of Chaos, she comes flooding back and she thinks, "oh you killed the thing that protects you. You just wait to see what happens." That's exactly it, if you kill the thing that structures you, you won't know it - it's like Nietzsche's prediction from the death of God. You killed this, think it doesn't make any difference, - wrong. It's like the Striders protecting the Hobbits. If you get rid of the thing that protects you then chaos comes flooding in and you have no idea what's possible. We do, though, because we lived through the twentieth century. We know exactly what's possible. Hundreds of millions of unnecessary deaths, that's what's possible. We're lucky we didn't blow the whole damn thing up, and we still could. People pursing their dead ideologies - you don't rescue the dead Father, than you're the puppet of death, that's what you are. Okay, on that cheery note.
So I think this part of the course is always a part I have difficulty with, because the conceptual transformation is very, very large. Because so far we've been talking about, I would say, biological and evolutionary realities, in a sense. And we've been doing that in a relatively standard manner. I mean, there are elements of Piagetian theory that run through it, there are elements of cybernetic theory, there are elements of neurobiology and neuropsychology. And none of it, I would say in some sense, is radically outside the way these sorts of problems might be discussed in a typical scientific or social scientific manner. Except for maybe the fact that we've drawn an explicit distinction between the world as a place of things and the world as a place of action. Now there are consequences to the idea that the world is a place of action that start to become more radical at this point. But drawing the relationship between what I've already talked to you about and the narrative domains that we're going to explore now, requires a... like a radical shift in conceptual focus. And so, the way I'm going to handle that is by hitting it from ten or eleven different directions, and building up a pattern. You know, if you listen to a complex piece of music, or at least this is my experience with complex music, is sometimes, the first time I hear it, I don't really like it, and I think I also don't understand it. I actually can't hear it. You know, maybe a musical genius could hear the whole thing instantly. You know, they say Franz Liszt could sight-read anything on the piano first try. So, you know, some people are so intelligent musically that it's incomprehensible, and I'm sure they hear things just fine the first time they hear them. But then what happens for me is that if I listen to it a couple more times or pieces or chunks of it, they start to fall into place that I can follow, and, you know, I can see the beauty sort of shine through those. And then eventually, the whole thing links together, and then I can listen to it, especially if it's a complex piece of music, many, many, many times. And the more complex, and probably the better, the piece of music, the more I can listen to it. But if I listen to it enough, at some point then I've had enough of it, and it's all a very strange phenomenon. Because one of the things you might ask yourself is, what exactly are you learning while you're doing that? You know, it seems like you want the music to be just exactly the right amount of predictable and unpredictable. If it's too unpredictable then you can't understand it and if it's too predictable it's boring, and so it's just like a conversation that way. It's actually just like life as well! You know, because you want things to be predictable and stable, and you want things to be unpredictable and interesting, and the degree to which you want each of those is going to depend on the time and the context and also on your own intelligence and temperament. Now, I'm going to tell you a bunch of stories and give you a number of pieces of information, and hopefully they'll click together. Now I think the reason this information has always been transmitted in story and image form is because it's very, very difficult to transform it into articulated, like into fully articulated explanation. It isn't really how it works. You know, we're not really accustomed to thinking about the idea that there are certain forms of information (that are valid forms of information) that can't be transmitted verbally. But of course, if you think about it, we all understand this deeply. Well, I can give you a bunch of examples. The first example is that when you speak, not only do you speak in words and phrases and sentences and paragraphs, but you also speak melodically. And in fact, part of the reason that you can understand melodies and that they make sense to you is that what artists have done is separated the melodic elements of speech from the semantic element, and then played with the melodic element. And the melodic element tends to carry a lot of emotion and intent. And so, if you're listening to someone speak, you can tell when they're being ironic, you know, because they raise an eyebrow, and their voice changes slightly, even though they might be using, in fact they are using, exactly the same words. And in fact someone who's very good at being witty or ironic will set the situation up so that you can barely tell that they're joking, and the better they are at that, the tinier the hint they give you that you can still catch on to, the funnier the situation is. So we know that information can be transmitted through non-verbal channels. It even happens during speech. And then, of course, we understand that music presents to us an intimation of meaning that's very difficult to fully grasp. And music for me has always been an ineffable phenomenon in some sense because it carries the intimation of meaning in a manner that can't be rationally dismissed, or that people aren't interested in rationally dismissing. Even punk rock nihilists listen to punk rock nihilistic music, and they find that meaningful even though they don't believe in meaning! And you know, in some sense they're victims of their own rationality, because they do believe in meaning (or else they wouldn't be listening to the music), but they can't understand how they could possibly believe in it, so their rational mind has dispensed with the idea. And sometimes people dispense with the idea of meaning, for lots of reasons. Partly because it's inevitable, in some sense, with sufficient rationality, but also because it's always useful to look for the underbelly of things, because it also justifies not bearing any responsibility for your life. And that's fairly... that can be a very desirable side-effect of the particular ideological rational belief. And then there's dance, of course, and dance is even more ineffable than music, although it's often paired with music, you know, and it grips people. If you see a remarkable dance performance, well part of it is that you're sort of thrilled and excited about seeing just exactly what the human form can do. Perhaps, partly, because you're human and when you see someone extending a certain ability far beyond the norm then it expands your sense of what a human being is capable of, so there's that, there's the pure skill element. And then there's the novelty element, because often if you watch a particularly good dancer there's things they do that you haven't seen before that you didn't know anyone could do and that's pretty fun. And then often the dance is joined with the music and the body is expressing what the music means and even though you can't tell what the music means you can tell that the dance is expressing it. See I think what happens there is that music represents the patterns of being. It's actually because people think of music as a non-representational art, but I think that's wrong, I think it might be the most representational art. Being is made up of layers of patterns constantly interacting, and hopefully in a relatively harmonious way, and music demonstrates that, mimics it in some sense, abstractly. And then the dance is an abstract representation. People adapt to the patterns of being and the dancer adapts to the pattern of music, and so it's symbolic, it's an embodied display of the place of the person in the cosmos. And you could also make that case when you see people dancing in pairs, because you could dance alone or you could dance in pairs, and that's basically standard human adaptation. And music is interesting too because one of the things you'll notice is that there's always music in a movie. Almost always. There's the odd movie that doesn't have it but it's quite marked when it's absent, you know. The movie feels a lot more cold and clinical, although it can work. But we accept the idea that music can be used to fill in the missing context in a movie without even ever questioning it, right? Like, it's very strange if you think about it, that you go to a movie that is doing... at least part of its function is to portray reality in a realistic way, but there's a soundtrack playing in the background all the time. You know it's so useful and so appropriate that you don't notice how strange it is that that's okay. So, my point is that we well, and then of course you can talk about novels and plays the same way, because there's a lot more to a novel than the words themselves. There's you know, a novel is a deeply layered thing, and part of your understanding of the novel is your understanding of the interrelationships between the layers, especially if it's a profound novel. I mean I think that's why we have this sense of depth in artistic and literary works. If the work is deep then it has many, many layers, and the more layers it has interacting at the same time, the more it's a useful representation of the essential elements of being, and so the more meaningful it is to us. So, that's all to say that there are modes of communication that provide us with information that we can't articulate but that we still act as if that information is valid. And you might say, well, valid for what, what exactly is it doing, what is it representing, what kind of information is it offering that's so compelling? And what's so interesting about it is the kind of information that we're talking, that information is so compelling, that you'll pay to expose yourself to it. You know, it's a rare lecture that you go to and have to pay for the lecture itself. I mean, you'll come to the university and you'll get your degree, but if you had your option on a Saturday afternoon, or a Saturday night, let's say, it's relatively unlikely that you would attend a lecture, and certainly even more than unlikely that you would pay to attend one, but you'll certainly pay to go somewhere to dance to music. And, you know, why that is, is not obvious. You say, well it's entertaining. It's like, yeah it's entertaining alright but it's a lot more than that, and I think that dismissing things that are enjoyable as entertainment, which means that they're sort of peripheral, they're unimportant in some sense is a real, it's a real terrible habit of psychologists. So for example, when Steven Pinker wrote his book... it's a book on language and unfortunately I can't remember its name at the moment... he devoted one chapter at the end basically, to non-verbal cultural forms and he talked about them as epiphenomenal, fundamentally. You know, they're just a by-product. And I think that's deeply wrong, I think that our culture actually grew out of dance and drama and music, and science came way, way later than that. I was watching an old video today. It was of The Animals playing House of the Rising Sun in 1964. It's a pretty good video, and it's a great old song. I mean, they didn't write it, it's an old blues song, but it's a great old song and they do a pretty good job of it. And the audience was full of girls and they were screaming madly away. Now it wasn't quite as bad as The Beatles, which was completely unbelievable, but it was still, you know, a fairly continual din of delighted shrieks. And, you know, I think that's extremely interesting because you'd never see that at a scientific conference students' laughter . Well, it's strange, eh? Like, there isn't anything else that elicits that kind of response. Maybe sports to some minimal degree, but certainly with nowhere near the same amount of enthusiasm. And you know, I mean, that's been happening for a long time, it wasn't merely a phenomenon of the 60s. I mean, I suspect it's been happening ever since there's been wandering minstrels, and that's a very, very long time. And I suspect that those wandering minstrels left many offspring behind them laughter . And well, what's interesting about that is, obviously part of the reason that human beings can sing is because we've selected each other for that ability, right? I mean there's something very attractive about someone who's artistically gifted. And the idea that women will do backflips for a singer is not necessarily any negative comment on their ability to evaluate what's important, it might be quite the reverse. So anyways, the point is that there's lots of different ways that we can communicate information. And you might say well it's only simple information that can be conveyed that way, and you have to convey the complex information in more formal forms, scientific and philosophical, but I think that's exactly backwards. I think we get to articulate the simple stuff first, which is only what you expect, right? Because when you're mastering something difficult, like the unfolding of being, the probability that you're going to get to the simple things first and the complicated things later is pretty much 100%. And I mean, different fields advance at different speeds, but the artists and musicians get to the complex matters far before the scientists and the engineers. And it has to be that way. One of the deep things I learned from Jung was that, as our knowledge expands out into the unknown, there are people operating at the periphery, and so they really have one foot in the unknown and one foot on dry land, so to speak. And some of them are more in the water than the others. And the ones almost submerged up to their neck, when they tell you what they're seeing, it has to be poetic and musical and artistic, because it's so far beyond our capacity to articulate, that we can't represent it in words. And so all that can happen is that the artist can get hold of it, and maybe the people who are prone to religious-like sentiments, at least experiences, which seems to be associated by the way with the trait openness. To have the actual religious experience, rather than to be an adherent of the dogma, which is associated with low openness. So for Jung, it was the artists and the entrepreneurs, because they're the same people, who were at the forefront of the expansion of what we know into what is unknown. And I think you can see echoes of that in the way in which cities are rejuvenated. Because what happens, you can certainly see this in Toronto, is that a part of the city that has some architectural or contextual interest but is badly run down, starts to get... at some point, you know, the artistic people show up and they think "Hey! This is kind of cool. If we just did this to it there'd really be something to it". And it usually doesn't hurt that the rents are low because of course artists never have any money. So then they go in there and civilise the hell out of it. And of course, they're renting, and that jacks up the property value, and then the people who are a little less open but kind of interested in art start flowing in behind them. And then soon the whole place is rejuvenated and expensive, and of course the artists have to go somewhere else. But that's a very interesting phenomenon, because what's happening is that even in the cities they're taking chaos and turning it into order, and that's what artists do. Now that's all to tell you that there are different ways of transmitting and representing information, and that you can incorporate the information without any articulated notion of what you're doing. So of course that's the case, because otherwise you'd have to claim that you understand everything that you do and can articulate it, and that's just wrong, you know. You have a theory of yourself but it's not a very accurate theory, which is why you're always doing things that are strange as far as you're concerned, which is also extremely bizarre. It's like, who the hell are you if you can't even control your own behaviour? And what does it mean to control it, and what does it mean to not control it? These are very, very complex and strange issues. Alright, so I think the best way into this is actually from an evolutionary perspective. And I'm not convinced that this is correct but I think there's something to it. So when you think about the nature of experience, then you think, well the nature of experience is quite different for different sorts of creatures. And one of the primary differences between creatures is the degree to which they're capable of social interaction and then of complex social interaction. And primates generally speaking are very social creatures. They live in troops, or packs, like dogs. Which is why we can get along with dogs, because we understand each other. Being hierarchical troop animals, we understand dogs, and they understand us, and they can fit right in, pretty much. And we're very, very good at figuring out where we are in the troop. And by 'we' I mean primates. I mean that's going back a very, very long period of time. You know, monkeys and chimpanzees have very sophisticated knowledge of the social structures surrounding them. They know who's who, and they know what status they are, they know what rank they are, essentially. And that's also the case with people. And so one of the things you might say about people is that our reality isn't nature, exactly. It's culture. Now, you can make the argument that you can't really distinguish nature from culture, and I believe that that's true and untrue, in a sense. I think you can talk about the human and non-human elements of reality. And you can identify the human elements of reality as culture, even though culture is so old that you can also think about it as an inevitable part of nature. So anyway, so most of our experience in our evolutionary past, at least let's say for the last several million years, we might as well go back to when the ancestors of humans hypothetically split off from the ancestors of chimpanzees. And people know very accurately when these sorts of splits occur, by the way, because what they do is they have some sense of the rate of transformation of DNA. You know it transforms and the rate is fairly constant across time. And so if you take two creatures and you determine how much genetic similarity there is between them, and how much difference, you could calculate how far back they diverged. And so, the fossil record helps with that, although it's very sparse. But the DNA record is not very sparse at all, in some sense, so you can be very accurate about it. We can even tell when people evolved or learned to wear clothing, and the reason we can tell that is because there's certain kinds of lice that can only live on clothing, and they seem to have diverged from the lice that live in hair about 50,000 years ago, something like that. And so the hypothesis is that, well, we must have been figuring out how to wear clothes at that point because the lice figured out how to live in them. So, you know, it probably took them a little while, but I doubt if it took them very long. You know those little creatures that breed fast, man those things can evolve quickly, much to our dismay. So okay, so a big part of the experiential field of advanced primates is the social world. And so we could call that the primate world. And we could also say that another big part of their experience is the non-primate world, which would be, roughly speaking, the natural world. And then we could also say that the other elements of their experience that are very constant are their subjective being. And we don't know much about the subjective being of creatures like chimpanzees, although you can understand, I think, the subjective being of a dog well enough to befriend the dog. And so you have some insight. And I think it's also reasonable to assume that... I mean for a long time people were unwilling to admit that animals had a soul, that was the first problem. But after that, that they were conscious. And even the behaviourists fought that notion. But I think the simplest thing to do is to assume that animals and human beings are the same, except when you can prove that they're different. Because we share so much of our evolutionary past then the logical inference is that if you think a dog is doing something sort of like you would do in that situation, and feeling that way, it probably is, with certain exceptions for species difference. And if that wasn't the case I don't think that you could have a relationship with the dog, or cat. You can't have much of a relationship with a lizard, although there are lizards, bearded dragons in particular, that are social. They like to lay on top of each other and they hang around together. And you can actually have more of a relationship with them. And apparently the same is true for iguanas. So you can go quite a ways backwards in evolutionary time, and still have enough similarity between you and the creature that you're interacting with, so you can get a pretty good sense of at least some element of their being. And so, the idea that subjective, or subjectivity, is a very ancient part of our experience, seems to me to be a perfectly reasonable supposition. We certainly know that it's been around, in all likelihood, for at least 150,000 years (on the conservative side), because there have been human beings that are essentially identical to us, from a genetic perspective, going back 150,000 years. But I think you'd have to be a pretty harsh judge to assume that higher-order primates like chimps don't have some consciousness. And you know, and some limited self-consciousness. You know, if you mark a chimp's nose with lipstick and then show it a mirror, it will, at least sometimes, take the lipstick off its nose. Although I've seen a gorilla try to fight with a mirror. Well no, I haven't personally seen that, but I've seen a very good video of that happening. But I think the gorilla in it would eventually figure out that it was him in the mirror. Dogs will recognise a dog in the mirror, but they seem to ignore their reflection very, very rapidly. And I don't know if that means that they have a very rudimentary self-consciousness, and that they figure out that that dog is them, or if the dog just doesn't smell like a dog, and then the dog thinks "well it can't be a dog because it doesn't smell like a dog". And dogs probably think that something is a dog because of how it smells, and not because of how it looks. I think that's why dogs don't seem to have any sense of relative size. Because you can get a little Chihuahua barking like mad at a Great Dane and you think, really? That's going to work, is it? But the dog doesn't seem to have a clue about that, like he's perfectly happy. And the Great Dane, weirdly enough, will often back off. Anyway, okay, so we've been in a social world, a deeply social world for a long time, and I'm also going to make the presupposition that we've been in the stratified social world for a very long period of time. And I think you could call that, if you wanted to, and I would never want to, by the way, you could call that the patriarchy. I think that I wouldn't call it that because that's not what it is. But I think that the fact that it's called that, and that that's accepted as a reasonable representation is actually a consequence of the action of an archetype. And the archetype is that, it's the archetype of the terrible Great Father, actually. Because you think, well there's a social structure with striations in it, and that has advantages and disadvantages. And the advantages are that you can live in it. And the disadvantages are that you have to follow the damn rules, and they might not necessarily be to your individual benefit. So, within a social dominance hierarchy, there's always a bifurcated, it also always has bifurcated significance. It can be good, and is good, insofar as it protects you from, say, from threat from without, maybe from other primates invading your territory, for example. But it can also be a very dismal structure if you happen to be at the bottom of the hierarchy. So anyways, as far as I can tell, that dominance structure is typically represented as masculine. And I think the reason for that, although I'm not absolutely certain of this, I think the reason for that is that our social hierarchies are probably more like chimp social hierarchies than they are like bonobo social hierarchies. So, the bonobos are kind of a strange breed of chimps. I don't know how many of you know about them. But the bonobos are extraordinarily sexual and they use sex, pretty much as a standard means of communication and tension reduction. And there's a lot of sex between the females and the bonobo troops, and the use of sex seems to bond them together in a way that keeps male aggression under control, which is quite interesting. But in the chimps the fundamental dominance hierarchy is male, although there's a female dominance hierarchy as well, and some females can certainly be more dominant than some males. But the fundamental structure seems to be male. And then I would also say, well, it's probably dependent to some degree in the primate community, and in other social animals, on other factors. So we know, for example, that the gender that has the highest level of testosterone tends to be the dominant gender. And so in hyenas the females actually have a higher level of testosterone. They're actually bigger and more aggressive than the males, and the price they pay for that is that they have to give birth through a structure that's very much like a penis, which is not the world's most pleasant experience, and might account for the hyenas' temper. But, in human beings, you know, you see sexual dimorphism. Men are slightly bigger than women, and that's also generally characteristic of creatures that have a dominance hierarchy that's tilted towards masculine. And then the other factor seems to be that human beings have... our infants have very, very, very, very long periods of dependence, and it's very difficult to manoeuver your way, doing anything, really, especially anything that has to do with competition and power, if you're taking care of one infant, let alone three. And so, it seems to me that those are all valid reasons why the primary power structures among human beings have typically been male, and why they're represented as masculine. Now there are other reasons too, because this is a multi-faceted phenomenon. I mean, one of the things that's interesting about human females is that they're selective maters. Now chimp females are not selective maters, and what that means is that the dominant males still have most of the offspring, but the reason for that, apparently, is because they chase the subordinate males away from sexually receptive females. Although the sexually receptive females will sneak off behind the rocks somewhere and mate with the subordinate male. But as long as the dominant male is around the probability of that is quite low. So the female chimps aren't sexually selective, whereas human females have concealed ovulation, so that no one knows when they're at their most fertile, and they're selective maters. And women in every society virtually, that's ever been studies, have a typical pattern of behaviour, which is that if you look at the female dominance hierarchy and you look at the male dominance hierarchy, the females will mate across and up dominance hierarchies, and the males will mate across and down. Which works fine for both genders, because their interests align. But it also means that in all likelihood women have exerted tremendous sexual selection pressure on men, and that might be part of the reason, of the many reasons, that we actually... you know the theory is that the common ancestor between chimps and humans was probably a lot more like a chimp, a modern chimp, than like a modern human. So for whatever reason, we've undergone a lot more transformation in the last 7 million years than chimps have. And one possible reason for that, and I think it's a highly probable reason, is that sexual selection operated a lot more viciously, so to speak, among humans. It's operated to the point where you have twice as many female ancestors as male. And you might think, well that can't be possible, but here's how it's possible. It's like, only every second man has children, had a child, while all women had one. Now of course, that isn't what happened, but on average that's what happened. So the proportion of men who are completely childless in any given generation is far higher than the proportion of women who are. So you see an element of expendability in males, and that's typical across the biological community, because you don't need as many males as you need females in order to keep the population moving forward. And one of the things that happens as a consequence of that, at least in principle, is that males are more behaviourally variable and variable across a lot of dimensions, than females are. And that's a plus, because they're more variable on the upside, but it's also negative because they're more prevalent on the downside. Now there's some substantial argument about that in relationship to people, what the actual implications of that are for human beings. One potential implication is that although women and men have equivalent IQs, the standard deviation is slightly different. Which means that there are more males who are intellectually impaired, but there are also more males who are four and five standard deviations above the population mean. You don't need much of a difference in standard deviation in order to produce radical differences at the extreme. So I'll give you an example. Males are more aggressive than females among humans, but the effect is only about half a standard deviation. And so what that means is that, if you take a female and a male randomly from a population and you were trying to guess who was the more aggressive of the two, most of the time, you know about 60% of the time, the male would be more aggressive than the female, but 40% of the time it would be reversed. So you know, that's a lot of overlap. But then here's the rub. So let's say just for example, that among the population of men and women combined, only the most aggressive person out of a hundred ends up in jail. Those are all men. Because that tilt towards aggression is enough, so that when you go way out on the distribution, the only people who are that extreme are men, even though the population difference isn't that great. So anyways, there's a massive debate in the relevant literature about the potential consequences of that for things like cognitive function, because there's some indication as well that men are more cognitively specialised but women are more cognitively robust. Anyways, it doesn't really matter. But what does matter is the fact of this permanent dominance hierarchy. Now, the dominance hierarchy, the male dominance hierarchy, also has another feature. So we already said that, you know, on average, men are half as likely to leave offspring as women are. And so what that means is that all things considered... this isn't... I'm not trying to make this into a circular argument. Because I could say it's the more successful males that leave more offspring. But then you'd say, well that's the definition, Darwinian definition, of success. But I don't mean Darwinian success, because that's self-evident. What I mean is, if you look in the modern world for example, and you try to predict number of available sexual partners for a given male, your best predictive measure of that is income. And the best predictive measure of that is intelligence and conscientiousness. And so, what happens is that males orient themselves in groups, and then they compete. And then women peel off the top. And so the women are in a position of judgment on men, and the judgment is the judgment of nature. Now, from a Darwinian perspective... you know, when we think of nature we think of, well it depends on who you are, but if you're an environmentalist you think of a French impressionist landscape, you know, forgetting that nature is also malarial mosquitoes and cancer, and rats infected with bubonic plague and all those other lovely things. But, from a Darwinian perspective, you can define nature much more straight-forwardly, and more accurately, as that which selects. Now, you know, you hear a lot about natural selection, and natural selection basically assumes that there is a random distribution of alteration in genetic structure, in any population, in any generation. And some of those random alterations will be more suited to that particular environment, suited being they'll live and they'll reproduce. And genetic transformation takes place across the millennia as the organism chases the landscape, roughly speaking. But Darwin, you know, Darwin, who was an unbelievably intelligent person, was also very, very interested in sexual selection, and as far as Darwin was concerned, sexual selection was just as powerful in modifying genetic structure, in driving evolution, as natural selection. And that's been very underplayed by biologists. That's only started to switch in the last... I would say it hasn't switched that much yet, but it started to switch probably in about the last 25 years. And that's because the idea of sexual selection makes things a hell of a lot more complicated. Because, well first of all, in a standard Darwinian account of evolution, there's no place for mind, there's no place for a creator, there's no place for teleology. And teleology is something moving towards an end, a goal, right? But the thing is, if sexual selection is operative, and if consciousness is ancient, then mind has been operating through sexual selection as long as there's been sexual selection. So you think, do you have any choice, do you make any choice in who your sexual partner will be? And the answer to that is, well it's hardly random, you make a choice! And what's interesting is that, you know, if you take 60 people, let's say if you took 60 women, and you showed them a bunch of men, and you asked them to rank them in terms of their attractiveness, there's going to be very consistent rankings. You know, I mean, we know what makes up attractive facial features, for women and for men, it's easy to determine that. What you do is you take 60 faces and you average the features. So you don't get the average person, because the average person is more like a median, you get the averaged person. And the averaged person has perfectly symmetrical features that are nicely shaped, and fairly big eyes, and they're very nice-looking, they're very attractive. And so, that means that there's like a central human form, in a sense, that we find attractive. And we see this in other species, for example there are butterflies who won't mate with another butterfly if it's like a sixteenth of an inch out of symmetry, because it's not a butterfly of that type, you know. And that's how people think too, if you deviate from the averaged person, the less canonically human you appear, and the less attractive you appear. And, you know, we're chasing this ideal in some sense that's an emergent property of the nature of our species. And then, you know, there's certain physical characteristics, wide shoulders in men, and narrow waists. In women, it's waist-to-hip ratio, a very common marker of beauty, across cultures, and across body types, interestingly enough. So, if you take thin women and heavier women, and you get men to rate the attractiveness of the women within that category, the heavy women and the light women who have a waist-to-hip ratio of about 0.68 are the ones that are judged most attractive physically. And so, that actually correlates, by the way, with fertility, because the abdominal fat in a young woman is a sign of ill health and also a marker of decreased likelihood of conception. Now none of this is operating consciously, obviously, it's deeply wired into us, it's part of our mediate perception. But it still does indicate that there's an ideal, like a platonic ideal, lurking at the back of our minds, against whom we compare everyone that we meet. And then you might say, well what's the nature of that platonic ideal, and that's a very, very complicated question. You know, I would say that you could almost literally claim that the... well you can certainly claim that the ideal male is represented in mythology as a hero. And that's actually what mythology is about, it's about representing ideal patterns of behaviour, so it's hardly surprising. And so, you know, if you go to a movie, and it's a romance, and there's the main lead character that you're supposed to fall in love with (if you happen to be the kind of person that would fall in love with that kind of person), then he's going to act out a particular pattern of behaviour. And the pattern of behaviour is quite identifiable. So for example he's going to move forward and explore, and not hide and cower. And the probability that he's going to be creative is very high, and the probability that he's going to be good-looking and strong is very high. And so, those are archetypal features. And those aren't all the archetypal features, because those are, in some sense, those are the self-evident ones. But you know, people are also evaluating each other for things like intelligence, and personality, and character. And you could say in some sense that men are competing to be the best man, and women are watching the competition to take the man who wins on the presupposition that he wouldn't win if he wasn't the best man. It's a very, very intelligent strategy. Because why not outsource the problem. Let the men sort it out, well as I say, it's too cognitively complex to compute. You could say that the male dominance hierarchy is equivalent to the stock market. It's exactly equivalent to the stock market. The stocks are always competing with one another, and with every other commodity, for primacy of price and value, and that's exactly what happens with male competition. So one of the things that we've just discovered in my lab, this is Caitlyn Burton's work, it's very cool, is that we took... we were trying to understand the fundamental sub-structure of conservatism vs. liberalism. And I'm going to speak in terms of conservatism, because that's how we construed the data, although we could've done the reverse if we were going to construe liberalism. And what we did was we took, we got a bunch of people to sit down and write down a bunch of statements that they though conservatives vs. liberals would disagree with. You know, I think we had, I don't remember how many statements, 300 statements, something like that. We had a lot of people generate them and take them from news items and so forth, because we didn't want any bias in the initial question set. Or we didn't want a bias that wasn't there in the actual world. So we had many people do this, and then we gave these questions to many, many people online, in a variety of stages. And we extracted those out that seemed to best fit the data, and then assessed them for the utility in predicting things like party membership or voting behaviour. And so we got a good structure, it makes a lot of sense, and what we found with regards to conservatism was that there was an ethnocentrism factor, it was the third and weakest factor, and that would be associated with in-group preference vs. out-group derogation. So those are anti-immigrant people, fundamentally, you know, and they're, well they're ethnocentric. That's the simplest way to explain it. And then the second smallest factor was religious traditionalism. And most of this was done with Americans, for a variety of reasons. And that was really where the fundamentalist Christians nested. And not everyone... that was not only a factor made up of fundamentalist Christian beliefs, but they loaded heavily. Those were people who weren't for stem cell research, they were anti-abortion, they were anti-gay marriage. Or they were pro-traditional, which is how they see themselves. And then, the largest factor was a factor that we called 'masculine independence'. And it was more characteristic of men, and what it basically consisted of was an attitude that winners win and losers lose, and that's just how it should be. So it was the men who... the personality predictors, one of them was extroverted assertiveness... hunting and the right to own firearms also loaded on this factor, but it was masculine competitiveness, I think, is the best way of thinking about it. And I think it's a good illustration of the kind of individual attitude that makes you more likely to attempt to climb up dominance hierarchies and dominate them from the top down. And that's not necessarily something that would be associated with factors like compassion. Well, I'll leave it at that. It's just that you can see... I'm telling you that because you can see how these proclivities manifest themselves in all sorts of areas of behaviour. I can tell you something else that's very interesting about men and violence. I don't know if I can get this story straight because it's been a while since I told it. So there's this interesting phenomenon, that's very characteristic of societies, I believe pretty much everywhere it's been studied. Now, you can calculate an index called the Gini coefficient. And the Gini coefficient is a number that represents how much inequality of income distribution there is in a given geographical area. So you could calculate a Gini coefficient for a street or an area in a city, or a city, or a state, or a country, you can do it at all those levels. And what you find is that, you know you always hear this idea that poverty causes crime. That's a classic left-wing idea. But it's wrong, it's seriously wrong. And it's importantly wrong. And it's definitively wrong, not only that. So there's no argument about this, it's already been established. What causes crime, especially aggressive crime, is relative poverty, and relative poverty is not the same thing as poverty at all. It's seriously not the same thing. Poverty is when you don't have enough to eat. Relative poverty is when the guy next door has a much better car than you. And there's lots of relative poverty in the United States, and there's some absolute poverty, but even the absolute poverty in the United States is nothing like the absolute poverty say in places like India or sub-Saharan Africa, where absolute poverty means you have nothing. Now, what's really interesting about the Gini coefficient is that if you go to places where everyone, roughly speaking, is poor, say by national standards... I think South Dakota was often used as an example, or maybe one of the Maritime Provinces... like Newfoundland, where there's low average income but it's pretty flat distribution, there's almost no crime. And if you go to places where everyone's rich then there's almost no crime. But if you go places where there's poor people and moderately well-off people, and rich people, and the distribution is really steep, then the rate of aggressive behaviour among young men, and it's usually within their own ethnic group, starts to sky-rocket out of control. And the reason for that seems to be that, if the dominance hierarchy is too steep, then the young men have no likelihood of climbing to a dominant position while playing the standard social game. And so what they do is turn to aggression, to make their mark on the world. And it works, too, that's the other thing. Make no mistake about it, if you're looking for status where status is hard to achieve, and you're the meanest, toughest guy around, and, you know, around a bunch of people who, like you, don't have much money, then you're going to benefit from that status. It works. Yeah? Would that be part of the reason why... because I know that, I think that violent crime rate in the US is higher than it is in Canada, would that be part of the reason why? Sure, yeah, I mean you can make a real conservative argument for making sure that, you know that conservatives are very anti-income distribution, and we figure that's because of the guys that have this male independence, you know they have this male independence factor, they don't want to be distributing resources to people who are down the dominance hierarchy because they want them down the dominance hierarchy! They want there to be a difference between the people on top and the people on the bottom, so that they can be the people on top, so that it increases their relative attractiveness. Like it's a perfectly logical game. And they presume that, well the rules are set up, and like every man can go for it, do his best, and the winner wins and the loser loses, and that's just how it is, and "don't ask me to fix it because I don't want to. And besides that I find it distasteful to attempt to fix it", more than that, right, because it's a moral issue, it's not just an intellectual issue. So you can make a case, however, from the conservative point of view, especially with regards to, say, beliefs in religious traditionalism, and the desire to maintain social stability, that you shouldn't let income distribution become too unequal. Like one of the big things your society has to do is to make sure that doesn't get out of hand, because it tends to get out of hand, it tends towards a few people having everything and almost everyone else having nothing. In a sense, it's a natural consequence of economic progression, which is actually something that Marx pointed out. Although an Italian named Pareto had figured it out at approximately the same time, and I think with a lot more conceptual clarity. But, the more unequal you let your society get, the higher the probability of death, roughly speaking, through violent causes. But I'm telling you why it is that, you know, men want to climb the dominance hierarchy, and the reason they want to climb the dominance hierarchy is that they get access to women. I was going to, actually ask earlier in the discussion, when you were talking about the familiar and the unfamiliar and the structure. So it seems like we all want to live within a structure, but we don't want the rules to apply to ourselves. Well, we have this contradictory problem, we want to be protected by the structure but we want to advance our position within it. And so that means, what that should mean, and this is I think the definition of civilised behaviour, is that you're allowed to advance your position within the structure as long as you don't disrupt it negatively. And I think that most people do do that. In fact I think people in civilised countries do that so effectively that it's an absolute, incomprehensible miracle. I can't understand how or why it ever got established. But like a psychopath will climb the ladder and cut the rungs off underneath him, fundamentally. He doesn't even care if the damn thing maintains itself. You know, he's perfectly willing to have it destroyed after he's exhausted it. But if everyone acted like that or even if a substantial number of people acted like that, the whole thing would come to a halt, virtually in no time flat. So I mean, why... see, you might... here's a reason... you know, because one of the things we were talking about is masculine violence. Now the thing about masculine violence is that it only tends to emerge in situations where there don't seem to be any other reasonably viable means of advancing status. So it's not reasonable to say that men are aggressive. You can say that on average men are more aggressive than women. And you can also say that if you put men in a situation where they have no, where they can see status differences but they have no means of moving forward, that they're likely to turn to aggression as a way of establishing dominance. And then you can say that, the reason for that is that it makes them more attractive, the fundamental reason. Yeah? Yeah, I'd just like to add on, I read this article once that talks about how polygamous societies are more violent than monogamous ones. Yeah, absolutely. I was going to say maybe it's because when one guy has two wives that means that 50% of the population has no wives, no access to sex. Yeah that's exactly right, the evolutionary psychology explanation for the pathology of polygamy is that once you let it establish itself then then men get ultra-violent. So would you say that monogamy would almost be a basis for civilised society? Many people have said that, and yes I think you can make a strong case for that. And I think the fundamental reason is the one you just pointed out. You know the idea is, well, would you rather have one woman, or die, you know? Sorry no, that's not quite right. It's more like, would you be willing to limit yourself to one partner or have a shot at many partners but a much higher probability of dying. Right, and you know, some guys will take that. They'll take the high-risk approach. So now, this doesn't eliminate the difference in individual differences in determining who's going to be aggressive, because what will happen is that as the Gini coefficient pressure rises, the more aggressive men, the men who are more aggressive by nature, will get more aggressive first. So you can imagine, it's a threshold phenomenon, in some sense. And what I should tell you as well is that the relationship between the Gini coefficient and male-on-male homicide isn't 0.2 or 0.3, which is the correlation that you'd get if you were predicting something like that using personality. It's like 0.8 or 0.9. It's like it eats up all of it, it's the explanation. So it's a huge effect, it's so big an effect that you can basically say that oh well, we figured that out. Although psychologists never know when they've figured anything out, and they keep endlessly retesting it over and over and over, because you know, we don't know how to bring our science to a stop. But if you don't accept the Gini coefficient-aggression data, that's like, you might as well throw the rest of social sciences out the window, because the effect is unbelievably powerful. What geographical area does this take place in? It depends... you can do it on any level of analysis. You can do it by county, you can do it by city, you can do it by state, and you can do it by country, and it works on all of those levels Student: Like, it predicts aggression, almost? You bet. Yeah. And that's a great question. I mean, the methodologically sophisticated studies have done exactly that, to ensure that it's actually this phenomenon rather than other factors that might be operative in that particular geographical area. So countries with a higher Gini coefficient are more violent, and cities within that country that have a higher than average Gini coefficient for that country are more violent on average. It's a very, very robust finding. Alright, so we're going to say, for the sake of argument, that you've got the male dominance hierarchy, and it's represented as masculine. Now, one of the things Jung said, now he thought that women carried an image of men in their unconscious. And he thought that the image that women carried of men in their unconscious was a group of men, not an individual man. He called that the animus. Whereas he believed that the image of women that men carried in their collective unconscious was of a single woman, and he called that the anima. Now I'm just telling you that, I'm not going to justify it, or even discuss it, but I just want you to keep that in the back of your mind. So I guess part of the reason I'm telling you that, come to think of it, is that I think it may provide some insight into why the idea of the patriarchy has become such a well-accepted notion. Because it is an archetypal notion, but it's a one-sided archetypal notion. Okay, so back to sexual selection. Now, we already talked about the fact that biologists perhaps were uncomfortable with the idea of sexual selection, because it brings a non-random factor into evolution. A seriously non-random factor, because you have to go back as far as you can in history to where there was no choice, on the part of the organism, to attribute evolution to natural selection alone. And you have to go back a long ways back, as I said, even butterflies are perfectly capable of distinguishing between a high-quality butterfly partner, in butterfly terms, and a low-quality butterfly partner. And you know, insects have been around for a very, very long time. So we have no idea, what that actually means is that we have no idea what role choice has made in the evolutionary process. But one thing that you can infer is that the reason human beings are the way they are now, and not like chimps or human ancestors, is because the sexual selection process got started, and it was intense. And so, as a consequence of that, here we are. And so, you know, maybe it was a good thing. Although it's very hard, in some sense, on all those people who failed. And that's, you know, roughly speaking, twice as many men as women. So then that all raises the question, like who exactly is responsible for the male dominance hierarchy? Because you could say it's male competitiveness, but you could also say, yeah well it's an inevitable function of female selection. Which is not an argument that you hear very often. But I think it's a very difficult argument to escape from. And that leads us to our next hypothesis. So we're going to say that the masculine dominance hierarchy is represented as masculine. I'm going to call that The Great Father for the time being. And that's the permanent dominance hierarchy of men, and it's always there, it moves through history. It's different men all the time, but the men slot in and out as they are born and die, but the structure itself stays intact across... forever. It's always there. It's been there at least for millions of years, so for our purposes we'll just call it permanent. It's a permanent part of experience, and it's a big part of it. And you know, as culture gets more and more... covers larger and larger expanses of territory, gets more and more sophisticated, it's an ever larger part of reality. I mean, most of us spend almost all our time coping with the dominance hierarchy, and almost none of our time combatting nature. You know, you get wet for a little while and that's it, you know, but most of the problems that you would face in a purely natural environment, you're so distant from them that you could hardly imagine, you can't even imagine what it would be like, in some sense, to be in an environment like that. Yeah? I have a question. Like your explanation of what drives men to become competitive and vindictive of the hierarchy... what drives women? Like for example there's an aggressive nature of women and there's some sort of competitiveness in women, let's say at the University of Toronto. So what is driving women to try to elevate their level in the hierarchy? Well, that's a good question. So the way I would answer that question is two-fold. So the question was what drives women to move to the top of the hierarchy? It's something that's worth discussing. So if anybody objects to what I'm going to say, then please do, because I'm not, you know, dishing this out as received truth, it's... I've been trying to figure this out and this is what it looks like to me. The first thing is that I think there are... male and female dominance hierarchies both exist but they're different. And that females compete with each other intensely, but they don't compete for the same things, and they don't compete the same way. So let me tell you a little story, this is a bit of a divergence, but it's an interesting point. And one of the questions I've always been asked in this class... because I'm going to lay out a hero story, and the fundamental hero archetype, and the hero is masculine in mythology... and so the women always ask, well what about the role of the woman? And it's like, it's very, very complex, which of course, all you women already know, because it is very, very complex. But it isn't something that... first of all I don't think it's a question that would've been asked before the invention of the birth control pill. Because we know what the archetypal female is, prior to that. It's the Virgin Mary with child, it's a virgin with child. Which means that the unit for woman is 'woman with child'. It's not woman, it's woman with child. And, well, it's obvious why that is, because as soon as you become a woman, in most societies, you have a child. Before that, you're a girl, and that's, you know, that's in some sense irrelevant, in terms of your destiny. Now you might say, well what's your archetypal pattern if you're not a mother? Well, the way it looks to me is that there's two archetypes for personal development, for the personal path, roughly speaking. There's the hero, and that would be the person that explores the unknown and discovers something of value and brings it back and distributes it to the community. So it's like a hunting... it's probably predicated on a hunting platform, because our bodies are hunting platforms, basically. And one theory about what men did, which is a very probable theory, is that they went out and hunted for meat. And chimps like meat, they'll eat it whenever they can, although they're not very good hunters. But they will definitely eat meat. And human beings are so good at hunting that we probably... well, for example, we probably wiped out the mammoths. And when human beings came into North America, there were as many different kinds of large animal in North America as there were in Africa, and human beings killed all of them. And that was just with... you know, like they didn't have our notion of technologically sophisticated weapons, it was bows and arrows and clubs and spears. Nonetheless, they got rid of everything, you know. Large cats, giant beavers, mammoths... we're very, very, very, very dangerous. Anyways, there's another archetype, I would say it's a maternal archetype in a sense, and one of the things that's very interesting about human males is that they're quite maternal, by comparison to other animals. So for example, the mother bear doesn't have the male bear, the boar... is it boars and sows with bears? I think it is. Anyways, you keep the cub away from the male, because he'll kill them. Now, not all males will do that but many will, they don't have any filial attachment. And that's the case for many but not all complex mammals. Pair bonding on a permanent basis is relatively rare, but joint provision of children, that's exceedingly rare. And men are pretty good at taking care of children. I would say they're not as good at taking care of infants as women are, because they don't have the full range of resources at hand. And they're not, I don't think they have the same kind of immediate intuitive understanding of, or attraction to, babies that women have. I think that switch is around the age of two or two and a half, when the kids can engage in rough-and-tumble play. Because men are much more likely to engage in rough-and-tumble play than women are, and rough-and-tumble play seems to be one of the things that civilises children. And it's partly because, you know one of the things you have to learn when you're a child is what actually hurts you and what can be ignored, and what actually hurts someone else and what can be ignored. And the best way to learn that is in rough-and-tumble play. Because what happens is that if you're playing with a kid, they get more and more excited and they do more and more crazy things, until they do something that either hurts them or hurts you, and then you have to say, look, you can't do that. And it's like a dance in a sense, you know, when you're playing with a kid. And you have to let them win fairly frequently, because otherwise they don't continue the game. And you can tell that because if the game is going well then they're laughing with insane life, because kids just love rough-and-tumble play. And they love crazy things and catch them and they think that's just great. But partly what you're doing is you're extending their body in all sorts of ways and getting them to learn, in an embodied sense, where their limits are and where the limits of other people are. And that's embodied. And children who haven't had that, man they're just so awkward, it's unbelievable. You know, they might have some hypothetical sense of how to interact with another person, but they don't have an embodied sense of it, and they can't tell the difference between what hurts them and what doesn't. Because often a young child, if they're startled, they'll start to cry. And then you can say, well that didn't hurt, and then they'll notice, well yeah it didn't hurt, and they'll stop crying. But if they haven't had their limits tested, they'll cry at anything unexpected, even if it doesn't hurt. And that's not good, because if you cry under all conditions the probability that you'll make friends when you're three is zero. Because another kid will start playing with you and maybe playing rough, and if you burst into tears, you know, several times, the kid's just going to go somewhere else and find a different playmate. You know, they'll say you're just a baby. Which is roughly, exactly accurate... roughly exactly laughter ... roughly accurate! Anyways, back to the archetypal representation. I think really the way to think about it is that for men, the hero archetype is the archetype that's dominant and in the forefront, and the maternal archetype is subordinate and in the background, I mean inside their own psyches. Whereas with women it's reversed. So each of the genders can play the role of the other gender but there's a tilt in each of them towards the... what would you say? Well I would say towards typical gender-normative behaviour. Now the social constructivists believe that no such thing exists, but those people are so pathological that even considering what they have to say is a mistake. So, you know they act as if there is no biology and everything's cultural, and it's like, well no, that's just not right. Now what biology means in practice and what you should do about it, that's a whole different question, but to think of all these differences as socially... height differences between men and women are not socially constructed, and they're relevant. And the upper-body strength differences between men and women are not socially constructed, and they're relevant too! So one of the things I was wondering about, maybe you guys can help me clarify this or tell me where I'm not thinking about this properly, and if you think there's any... if I'm missing something let me know. One of the things my daughter said, she watched my son one day have a fight with his best friend. It was a physical fight, you know. His best friend did something that my best friend didn't regard as appropriate and so he hit him, and then there was a fight. And then three days later they were friends again. And my daughter said to me that she was very annoyed by that, which wasn't the fight exactly, but the fact that they could have a fight and then they were friends again three days later, because she said that that option wasn't available to women, right? And the option is, the option that the men have is, "well if you get out of hand I'll just sock you one", and then we'll have established where the boundaries of behaviour begin and end. And I would say that in my experience, if I'm talking to someone who's self-confident and masculine and accomplished, there's always an undercurrent of potential violence. It's an undercurrent. And that's actually an undercurrent of respect, which means that there's things that we can do to each other in a civilised way, but there are rules that if you break, all hell's going to break loose. And one of the consequences of that is that it doesn't. Now the typical bullying pattern for women in high school and junior high is reputation destruction. And I'm wondering, what are the implications for the conduct of behaviour if there is no recourse to aggression to solve disputes? Because they don't get solved. You know, I've tried to analyse what it means to say 'no' to someone, because 'no' means something. 'No' means... well if you tell a child 'no', what you're basically telling the child, as far as I can tell, is if you continue doing that something you won't like will happen to you. And if you're civilised and say no what happens is you say no a couple of times and then instead of devaluing the word, which is what you do if you just said it over and over a hundred times with no consequences, you take action that's non-verbal. And so one of the things you might do is remove the child from the situation, or you might put them on the steps. Or maybe you put them on the steps and they run away, so you have to hold them on the steps. But the point is, the point to the child is, there are limits, and if you exceed them, you will be physically controlled. What if there's no option for physical control? What happens? Well I don't know the answer to that, I don't know what women do about that but I also don't know what men do about that in relationship to women. So I was watching something the other day, it was this... I posted it on my Twitter account as an example of animus possession. So a woman and a man were having a dispute on the street. It was a political dispute. And this particular woman, the way she was behaving towards this particular man, was such that had she been a man, and had he been a man, he would have definitely hit her. Because she was right in his face, and she was cursing at him and swearing and calling him an idiot. And really being hyper-aggressive. And of course, he couldn't do anything about it. So then I was watching that and I was thinking, just exactly what are you supposed to do in a situation like that? Because you're screwed no matter what you do. If you're on the male side, it's like, you certainly can't intervene physically. It's like you're dead in the water instantly, instantly, in your eyes, the eyes of society, and in the woman's eyes, instantly, if you move past the boundary. If you leave, well, there's no glory in running away, that's for sure. So what exactly is supposed to happen? I have no idea what's supposed to happen in a situation like that. I think what happens, what will happen over time, is that men just won't put themselves in those situations. I think what the male would have to do in that situation is behave like a woman would, in a female dominance hierarchy. So he stands there and takes it and afterwards goes off and bad-mouths her to her social circle. That's a form of aggression. Right, right, but you know that's definitely not seen as an admirable form of behaviour among men. I mean, I don't think it's an admirable form of behaviour, period. But I mean, you know, aggression is often not admirable, so that's fine. Yeah? I think that when you take away emotion, like when someone's acting really aggressively towards you and you reserve your emotion, it gives them a lot less to feed off of, and that ends up taking power away in a similar way that aggression does. Because people react aggressively and they want feedback that gives them more excitement... Oh definitely. Oh yeah it would've been a real victory for her if she would've gotten slapped. Absolutely, because it would prove everything she said instantly. Yeah, but when you dismiss, power's gone. So then you have all the power. Yeah, yeah. Well I think that that would be a reasonably effective strategy for a street confrontation like that. I'm not so sure how well it would work in a prolonged competition inside a company, for example. In a hierarchy, yeah, because you know the truth of the matter is that men have no idea how to treat women if they're in male power hierarchies. They have no idea how to treat them. And that's because we have no idea how to do that. No one has any idea how to do that. It's only been happening, in any pronounced sense, for about, well, on a societal level, really probably since the mid-70s. You know, it's three generations. It's a drop in the bucket. And it's a very, very difficult thing to sort out. So, I mean part of the reason I've been thinking about these sorts of things is because I've been very interested in the fact that men have been doing very badly in junior high and high school, and they're bailing out of universities like mad. At the rate it's going there'll be almost no men in most disciplines within ten years. I mean you can tell that even in this class. It's funny because on my YouTube videos I look at the gender distribution for viewing and it's 80% male, which is interesting to me. I'm not sure exactly why that is. But in lots of fields it's 80:20 women already, and I can't see why that won't... I think that'll accelerate as we move forward, rather than slowing down. Alright, so anyways, back to sexual selection and the power hierarchy. Now from a Darwinian perspective, one of the things you might do is call whatever selects 'nature'. And so when we think of nature and we think about nature from a scientific perspective, we don't even think about humans as agents of nature, right? We tend to think of the human being as something that stands against nature. That's in mythology. It's like, the human being against the natural world, it's a very common plot in movies and stories. So it's man against nature, roughly speaking. So we tend to think of those as separate categories. But if women do the selection among human beings, at least they do the intense selection, then women are nature, for men. And that's exactly what the archetype is. It's Mother Nature. And Mother Nature has a very vicious element, and the vicious element of Mother Nature is rejection. And that can be maternal rejection, which is, you know, certainly something that causes a tremendous amount of trauma. But it can also be the most fundamental form of rejection, and the most fundamental form of rejection is sexual rejection. Because it means that you are judged as biologically unworthy, roughly speaking. And there's other reasons why... so the reason I'm telling you this is because I've been trying to puzzle out... what you see in mythology quite clearly is that the dominance hierarchy is represented as male, so culture is male, and nature is female. Well, why the hell would nature be female? It's like, okay, well I've given you one reason, and I think it's the primary reason. There's other reasons, because nature is also seen as that which produces natural forms, and of course, women produce natural forms, so that's a logical association. And then, what's the other one? Well, we can leave it at that for the time being. So, now let me show you how I think that that's represented. I think this is the way the world is structured when you consider it as a place of action. So the world as a place of action has characters, like the elements are characters, and the characters are engaged in dramatic behaviour. And there are classes of characters, and as far as I can tell, this is a reasonably comprehensive classification of dramatic characters. We'll start from the inside and go out. And you can think of any of these as primary, by the way, and you'll see that reflected in different kinds of mythology. So sometimes the maternal is primary, and sometimes the culture is primary, and sometimes the hero, the individual is primary. And I think that's because these three things are irreducibly primary. In that, from the perspective of consciousness, in that, to be conscious, there has to be you, but if you're conscious you have to have evolved within a culture and that's culture is necessarily nested in the natural world, and so wherever there's one there's all three. And the individual's also the thing... without the individual there wouldn't be any separation between nature and culture. So you can see the individual consciousness is the generator of the entire structure, but you can say that about any of the characters. So there's the archetypal son, because the hero tends to be masculine, and then, it has a... that character has a positive element and a negative element. And the positive element is the good person, and the negative element is the bad person. And I would say the archetypal representations of those are, like, the saviour, and Satan. And that's basically... there are portrayals like that in virtually every system of mythology and religion. Now it seems to me that in some sense Christianity, and this was probably under the influence of the Zoroastrians, developed the most articulated representation of good vs. evil at the individual level. And that's why you can identify two fundamental characters in the Christian story, so to speak, that play out these roles. And they're seen as eternal adversaries locked in battle across time. And that would be, the battle takes place in the natural world, the battle takes place in the cultural world, and the battle takes place within, as well. And you can see that reflected in stories all the time, because, you know, it's so frequently the case that the hero, the super-hero has his nemesis. And it's the guy that he's extraordinarily well-matched with who continuously tests his wits and whose motivation is essentially destructive. So you see that with Batman and the Joker, for example, or you see that with Sherlock Holmes and Moriarty. There's always this pairing and that's partly because I think the archetypal realms of human decision-making are something like, are you working to make things better or are you working to make things worse? Are you possessed by resentment and hatred, so that you want things to degenerate and burn, or are you hopeful and capable of manifesting faith in the future so that you're working to make things better? And then there's a battle in everyone, in their own psyches, and then there's a battle in culture. There's a battle everywhere between those two fundamental perspectives. And then the archetypal son is the son of the Great Father, and the Great Father represents two things, order and tyranny. So there's the hero and the adversary, at the individual level, and at the social level there's order and tyranny. And so, roughly speaking, that's either the wise king or the despot. And the despot is someone who tries to eat his own sons, which is actually a fairly common mythological trope. And you know, you're under the thumb of the despot when you're not allowed, really, either to be hero or adversary. You're just a cog in the structure of the social world. So that's despotism. On the orderly side, well, culture is what we're sitting in right now. I mean, this is social order that encapsulates us. Everything about it is social order. I mean, there are rows, they're roughly linear, you know everyone's in their place, everyone knows what to do, we're unbelievably protected from virtually anything you could possibly imagine. And so you know, we're in our father's living room, so to speak. And in that living room, it's a safe space... oh God I should never have said that... laughter anyways, it's a well-protected space in which people are able to play and explore. And it seems to me that one of the functions that fathers play in a family, if they're fulfilling their function properly, is that what they do is they put a perimeter around the territory, so that inside the walls, so to speak, it's safe, and inside the safe walls the children can play and explore. And in their playing and exploring they develop their own individuality. And so, you know, you keep the darkness at bay, and you can certainly see that that's what the children want, because as soon as you put them in a dark room, the first thing they say is, you know, come chase the monsters away out from underneath the bed. And you know they wouldn't be thinking that if they hadn't had an extraordinarily long evolutionary history of being chased by monsters in the dark. And there are monsters in the dark, and everyone knows that. Which is why you tell your children not to go play at night after it's dark, even now. So order and tyranny are the representations of culture. And the thing is that there's a constant interplay between those two because you can never tell exactly when order has gone too far and become tyranny. Andy you can never tell really when there's so little order that, well the next thing happens which is the emergence of chaos. And chaos is the Great Mother. And it's creative and destructive. And that's nature itself. And then on the outside, the very outside, and this is the most complicated category of all, is that, it's the dragon of chaos, and it represents something that's very difficult to conceptualise. But it's the un-configured substructure of being that gives rise to these other categories. So Donald Rumsfeld at one point made a very famous comment, it became famous because it fits an archetypal structure. He said that there are known unknowns and unknown unknowns. Okay, the dragon of chaos is the unknown unknown. It's so unknown that you don't even know it's there, but it can raise its head at any given point. It's the thing that leaps out of you in the darkness. It's like, is it Zika, is that the new virus? It's like the Zika virus. It's like, no one saw it coming. It's a completely new manifestation of being. And so, known unknowns you can make plans to circumvent, unknown unknowns, they're completely unpredictable. And what's so interesting, this is where it's so bloody complicated, because you really have to think about things differently to grasp what this means. This is part of the reason why I had trouble with this section of the course on alchemy, because it's so complicated that it's... okay, so here, think of it this way. What is the unknown made of? That's a pretty weird question. So I'll try to walk you through it, and we won't get very far with this, because we'll have to do it 15 or 20 times I think before it starts to become something that you can grapple with. Alright, so it's September 11, 2011 and the Twin Towers have just fallen. Sorry, 2001, yes, 9/11. Alright, what's emerged? What's happened? Well, one answer to that is that the towers fell, but it's a very, very poor answer. Because that was an unknown unknown, I would say, and it traumatised people. I mean everyone, even in Toronto, walked around in shock for about two days after that. And the reason for that was that we didn't know what fell. The buildings fell, but the thing is the buildings aren't isolated. Like, they're not some abandoned buildings standing out there in the middle of a field in a barren wasteland in the middle of an abandoned country. They weren't buildings, exactly. They were only buildings at a superficial level. First of all they had 5000 people in them, or 5000 people died, if I remember correctly. And then all those people were networked out with all sorts of other people. And they were networked at multiple levels. So they were family members but they were also elements of the financial and economic machine. And in the political machine. And then what was hit was of course, not just the buildings, but the economic and political system, whatever that means. And of course the people who took the towers down weren't trying to knock buildings down, which is what you saw happen, they were trying to knock down the things the buildings invisibly related to. And then you might ask well, what were those buildings invisibly related to? And it's a simpler question to actually reverse the question and ask, well what weren't they related to? And the reason that people were traumatised in the aftermath was because when we, when our bodies, in some sense, answered that question, the answer was, uh oh, those buildings were probably attached to everything in every possible way. And so God only knows what's going to come leaping out of that. So what happens when you see the buildings fall, the facts that you see the buildings fall actually blinds you to what's happening. It's a very peripheral representation of the actual event. Because you could also say, well it was a psychological event, you know, it echoed inside of you. Well, you don't see that, you feel it, and you don't really know what it means. But it puts a wave of uncertainty, a radical wave of uncertainty, into everything. And not only the present, but also the future for sure. Because things took a vicious turn after that, and almost immediately, right? The whole political system readjusted itself, it became much more authoritarian. You know, airports became little fascist enclaves. You know for me, for many people, I could hardly go into an airport. It just drove me crazy to be lined up like that and then subject to search, you know, by faceless representations of the paranoid state. God, that's a horrible thing to have to encounter. It's a bloody horrible thing to train people to get accustomed to. It's really dangerous to train people to accept that sort of thing. It was a way worse consequence I think, than the buildings falling down themselves. But that was one thing that happened. What else happened? Well the one trillion dollar surplus that was projected by the Clintons at the end of Bill Clinton's presidency, which was the prediction for the next ten years, that the economy was doing so well that the US government was going to have a one trillion surplus over the next ten years, turned into a four trillion dollar deficit. So that happened. Well and then we got tangled up even worse in the Middle East, and of course that, I think that's probably got worse as time's gone on rather than better. And we have no idea where that's going to end. You know, I mean Russia's involved now, and Russia rattled nuclear weapons at Turkey the other day. You know, even though Turkey's their largest trading partner and a member of NATO. And then you know, a million refugees flooded into Europe, and God only knows what's going to happen as a consequence of that. And it's not like the people who planned the bomb didn't know that, like here's what they thought. They thought "oh, the Soviet Union, that was the second greatest power on Earth, and then they waded into Afghanistan. And they got tangled up in a terrorist war and oh, poof! Ten years later they didn't exist. Maybe we could do the same thing to the United States". It's like, well, who knows? Maybe you could. I mean they certainly... the response to the 9/11 disaster, in my opinion, was much more expensive than the disaster itself. I mean, one of the things that's quite horrifying is that here's one statistic: nobody flew in the aftermath of 9/11 for a while. Like airplane flight bookings were way down. More people died in car accidents (because of not flying) than were killed in the bombings. And no one ever noticed that, because people are being killed on the highway all the time, right? I mean it's background noise as far as we're concerned. But you know, it's a really good example of how not only do you not know what the event is, you can't even tell who the event killed. And so it's your apprehension of that, when it occurs, that paralyses you. And so that's the dragon of chaos, roughly speaking. That's an unknown unknown. It's like all of reality, all of the multiple levels of reality that exist around you are all of a sudden altered in an incomprehensible manner. And then you could say that well, what happened was the alteration of that reality. This is what happened. It's that you can only perceive it, essentially, as the explosion in the building and the consequent collapse. And so you might say that the Twin Towers were brought down. It's like that's such a low-resolution representation of what happened that it barely begins to describe that event. And so it's that invisible background of complex interrelationships, like a very, very complex melody, that's always going on around you. And as long as it works you don't even notice it. What happens is that it manifests itself as predictable and desirable order. Which you can understand, and which is the reason we have predictable and desirable order. This room is configured so that you can walk into it without being afraid. And what that means is that it's a radically simplified version of reality. You know, and you can see that, I mean, it's even got padded walls, and that's to stop the sound bouncing so that it won't annoy you. You know I mean it's warm, it's comfortable, it's sort of neutral so it fades into the background. Everyone here is civilised beyond belief. You hear about the radical individualism of the West... I think of all the nonsense I've ever heard that's got to be the most nonsensical, we're so bloody obedient that it's insane. If you go to Edmonton at 3 o'clock in the morning and watch pedestrians, they will stop at the 'don't walk' light and wait until it turns green laughter . Now the roads are wide and so they... but it's still the case. It's like, really?? You think you're an individual, really? And I'm not complaining about it, I think it's an amazing thing because you know we can really zip cars through our cities because people don't run out into the middle of the streets and get killed, they stay where they're supposed to so it's incredibly efficient. But we're so obedient and well-behaved that it's beyond... if you think about us as chimpanzees with clothes, you know, we're doing pretty damn well. And we set up our environments so that they're so simplified that we never have to encounter this multi-dimensional layered reality of patterns that's just moving around us all the time and that actually makes up reality. That's reality, that's what the world is made out of. That's a way different way of thinking about it than to think of the world as made up of, say, of atoms. Because you think, that way you just think, well it's marbles in space, you know. And of course atoms aren't marbles, and everyone knows that, like God only knows what they are. But that's still the image, that's still the metaphor, of reality. But that's not what reality is. It's an insanely patterned orchestra of phenomena and that's really what it is and then what happens is that you're in this little orderly sub-compartment in the middle. It's like, you're in a box and the box is in a box. Well, let's think about it. You're in a box, okay, this box is in a building, that's a box. The building is in the university, that's a box. The university is in the city, that's a box. The city is in the province, that's a box. Then it's in Canada, then it's covered by the American nuclear umbrella, you know, and then it's embedded in this immense history of individual rights and freedoms that have manifested themselves as part of the political and economic order. And all of that's going on around you and people are working like mad, crazily, to keep all of those boxes intact, and here you are sitting and thinking, well, what you see around you is reality. It's like it is, yeah, but man, there's a lot of people making this reality so simple that you don't have to think about it. You can come in here and think about ideas, you know for like hours at a time, and you don't get eaten by a crocodile. It's really... and you know no one comes running through here pillaging, which is of course... the crocodile eating and the pillaging were very, very common occurrences in our evolutionary history. For lots of our ancestors going down to get water from the local river was a life or death mission. I mean I can't imagine having to get water from a crocodile infested stream. Especially when that's where the lions are hanging out too, you know. So, that's order. That's the positive element of order. Now you can say, students say this a lot: "oh my God, I'm so constrained within these boxes, it's destroying my individuality" you know. And that's the tyrannical... I mean it's pathetic in some sense, because God, you're so privileged it's beyond comprehension. But having said that, it is also the case, and the case has to be made, that you do have to sacrifice your potential to cultural norms. And that is... you can argue that that's destructive. And sometimes it is destructive. Like creative people don't fit very well into nested boxes. And in order for them to fit they have to do damage in some sense to their psyches, because they're not naturally made to... that isn't their natural environment, boxes within boxes. And so they might say, well I'm being oppressed. It's like, well of course you're being oppressed. If you're in fifty boxes that's constrain your freedom of movement, but maybe you should be somewhat grateful for the fact that the boxes exist. You think, well you don't even notice them. The boxes are so effective that you don't even notice them. You can even criticise them, and you should, you know, maybe they could be better and not quite as rigid, and so forth. And the criticism is justified but you have to keep both of the representations in mind at the same time, you know. Your culture is the wise king and the despot at the same time. And people hate that sort of thing because... and you know our rational minds and our history of logical intellectual thinking has forced us to assume that a thing can't be itself and its opposite at the same time. But unfortunately when you're talking about very large-scale categories, things are what they are and their opposite at the same time. Because culture is the wise king and the tyrant, and that means it's very difficult to adjust your behaviour in relationship to it, because you never know if you're talking to the wise king or the tyrant. You know, and you feel that. If you have to do your taxes or if you have to deal with the university bureaucracy in some way, it's like, you're a number, you know, and you're just annoying, like patients in the hospital, because hospitals would run a lot better if they didn't have any patients in them, obviously. And you know, you feel that, of course, whenever you're in a very complex bureaucracy. It's like, you're exchangeable, and that's very annoying. But by the same token, here you are. So you have to criticise... this is also a very complex form of moral behaviour. You have to criticise with gratitude. And that's something that students should really be taught in university, because the opposite of gratitude is resentment, and there is nothing that's more pathological than resentment. The only thing that comes close to resentment, in terms of its capacity to produce misery, is arrogance, and those things are often... arrogance, resentment, and deceit... it's like that's the evil triad. You get all those three things going in your life and boy, you're going to be in rough shape very, very rapidly. So then, let's take a break, for fifteen minutes, okay?
So, I want to take another look at this figure to begin with. Now, one of the reasons that I began to think about these sorts of things is because I wanted to understand what it might mean to have a set of, let's say a set of values and beliefs (because those two things go together), that would... I guess part of the question was, is it possible to develop of system of beliefs that's outside of the realm of ideology? You know, because one thing you might claim is that it's all ideology. Any belief system is ideological. And if you develop a belief system that criticises other belief systems it just means that you've developed a new ideological stance. And there's some... that's a good argument, you know. I can think of a number of ways that it's true. One of the things Nietzsche said in the late 1800s was that if you inhabited a belief system, even a religious system, and you lost faith in it, not only did you lose faith in that system, but you also potentially lost faith in systems themselves. And so, it was a meta-collapse, in a sense. Not only did you lose your belief, but you lost your belief in beliefs. So you think of the set of all possible beliefs and then abandoning any hope of relying on those as valid sources of information. You know, so that's one perspective and it's a powerful one, and Nietzsche believed that that was a certain pathway to nihilism, essentially, or perhaps to a reactionary totalitarianism, but it boils down to the same thing. I've been reading this book recently, the title of which I can't remember, unfortunately. But I'll tell it to you after class. It's a critique of certain lines of left-wing ideological thinking, including the existential thought of people like Jean-Paul Sartre, and Foucault. And one of the most trenchant critiques of Sartre, because he believes that you have an absolute freedom, that you're destined for freedom, that you're doomed to it, in some sense. And that part of your existential journey is to establish an authenticity that's correct for you. But he doesn't, he isn't able really to give any description of what that should be grounded in. And the critic concludes that all Sartre can do is stand outside of any potential belief system and criticise it. And that that's... there's nothing in it for anyone as a consequence of that. It's only destructive. Now, it's important to remember, with regards to Sartre, that he viewed other people, to some degree, like the common man, the bourgeoisie, we might say, as the embodiment of non-freedom, of inauthenticity, and also as a barrier to genuine authenticity. So he wasn't willing to give any credence to the utility of normality. But I also think he wasn't able to tolerate the consequences of his own thought, because he was an avid supporter of the communist party, far after anyone with any reasonable moral sense would have stopped doing that. So Sartre didn't really denounce the communists until the end of the... beginning of the 70s, roughly speaking. He was never a card-carrying communist, but he was very left-leaning. And you know by the 1970s, by the late 60s, by the early 70s, a lot of the evidence about what was going on in Soviet Russia had been in for 30 years. So there was really no excuse for not facing up to that, and trying to understand what it meant. And you know, it would be bad enough if it was just the Soviet Union, but it wasn't. The same sort of thing happened wherever those utopian presuppositions were put into place. And I suppose many of you don't know this, but Pol Pot, who was the Cambodian dictator, was educated at the Sorbonne, and he wrote his thesis (I think it was his PhD thesis, although it might have been his Master's thesis) on the Marxist doctrine that urban people were parasites on rural people. So you know, there's a theory that says that the general value is generated purely by labour, and much of that is rural labour, and the cities siphon off the excess productive power and are able to parasitize the countryside as a consequence of that. Which is a, you know, tremendously non-productive theory. But Pol Pot put it in practice, and so when he went back to Cambodia he chased everybody out of the cities and killed about six million people. So, you know, you can read about that if you want. It's a pretty appalling section of 20th century history. Especially when it was the case that he was educated in the West and had these presuppositions drummed into him. Well then there's Foucault. Foucault, who I have no respect for, by the way... I've read a fair bit of Foucault, and I think everything he says is obvious. So for example, he criticises the idea of mental illness as a social construct. It's like, well yeah, obviously. I mean, it's not like psychiatrists and psychologists and mental health professionals, who are relatively well-informed, haven't known about that since... for the last 60 years. I mean, it might be a revelation to people who don't notice that psychiatry, for example, is something like a compromise between the patient biology and the social world. You know, I mean, psychiatric ailments often have a biological tilt, but the way they manifest themselves in society is clearly conditioned in very intense ways by the particular conditions obtaining at the point that the person who has that biological predisposition exists, even when it's not pathological, can be tilted one way or another by cultural norms. And then of course, when you're dealing with issues like insurance payment, and treatment, and hospitalisation, obviously you're pulling in all sorts of systems that are by no means purely scientific. But I don't find it a particularly useful critique. It's obvious, as far as I'm concerned. And, the other thing that Foucault did. I mean, I think this is the typical, especially the French intellectuals', typical sleight of hand once Marxism became... you know, once you were no longer able to call yourself a committed Marxist, because committed Marxism had led to unbelievable brutality, you know, on a scale that had never been experienced in the entire history of the planet, at least in terms of its reach and duration. You didn't get to call yourself a committed Marxist anymore, unless there were people (and you still see them) saying "well that wasn't real Marxism), which I think is a cop-out of staggering proportions. It usually means "well if I was the person running the country that wouldn't have happened". That's the logic behind it... "they didn't put the principles into practice properly". It's like yeah well lots of people put the damn principles into practice and the same thing happened everywhere. So at some point you have to kind of wonder if there's something wrong with the principles. Anyways, what Foucault did was take the Marxist presupposition that everything could be boiled down to economics and economic power and translate it into the idea that everything just translated into power, you know. And that the reason that we have institiutions is to include and to exclude and that the institutions always run for the benefit of those at the top. It's like well yeah, that's a little bit true, but it's... a scientist would look at that and say well probably... you know, power dynamics in a functioning economic and political system maybe account for 10% of the variance, something like that, maybe 15%. It's like, say you want to go to an Ivy League school. Well if you're parents went to the school you're more likely to get in, but you're not that much more likely to get in and you still have to be... you know roughly speaking what happens is if you have a pretty decent high school GPA and you do very well on the SATs, and you have some other talents of some sort, because that's also necessary, then they might pick you over someone else who's roughly equally qualified if you have a familial history attendance at the school. So obviously you get an advantage, but it's not the kind of advantage that accounts for the entirety of how the system is structured. It's an advantage. Well, you can say that's not fair. It's like, yeah okay, fair enough. Most systems are certainly not 100% either fair or just, definitely not. But, you know, instead of comparing them to utopia you might compare them to another system, which is the only reasonable way to do it. It's like, everything looks terrible when you compare it to the best thing you can possibly imagine. But the best thing you can possibly imagine is an empty fiction, because it's so devoid of detailed content that you can't use it as a guide to reality. Now, I mean, the idea that things could be better has its roots in, in some sense, a broad-scale utopian project, and I believe things could be better. But that doesn't mean that when you're doing an analysis of a complex system you get to compare it to an ideological utopia and then describe all the reasons that it's bad. It's not appropriate to do that. It's too simplistic, you're not going to do anything to actually address the problems that the system has if you take that approach. And then, of course, pure utopian thinking is extraordinarily dangerous. Because if you think that you're way of molding society into some ultimate state of perfection is headed towards some ultimate state of perfection, then you can justify absolutely anything you do right now, on the basis of the fact that things are going to improve so radically in the future. And that means any of your behaviours are excused. The end is worth it. Well, if someone says that, you have to kind of wonder what they're actually planning to do. Okay, so, well what's the issue? The issue is that it's... so the same critic, with regards to Foucault, said that well it's basically the same thing, that Foucault criticised a variety of profound institutions. Sexual institutions say, like marriage, and then institutions of power, like prisons, and institutions of mental health, like the whole institutional framework. He criticised them on the basis of power and exclusion. And you could do that and there's some truth in it. But you know Foucault also made the presupposition, and the problem with that presupposition, that everything is about something else, is that it's almost impossible to see how it can't be applied to Foucault himself. So you'd have to ask, if you were a student of Foucault, what power aims drove his attempt to analyse everything in terms of power? And I actually think with Foucault it's pretty obvious. But it's a game that never goes anywhere. Okay, so I thought about that a lot, it's like, is there any system that you can develop that doesn't have the negative consequences of systems in general? And then if that is possible, how and why might it be possible? And this is partly why I'm talking to you about this particular diagram again. I think the reason, now I don't know this, and you guys can think it through yourself. I mean, lots of people have talked to me about the content of this course and you know, they've said that it's been very helpful for them when it comes to interpreting certain elements of their life. But some people have said well it's just another system. And I don't believe that. I think it's a meta-system. And I don't think the rules that apply to systems also apply to meta-systems. But you know, that could just be me. So you're going to have to decide that for yourself. But I think the reason that I can make that claim, and that it's a valid claim is because first of all, I don't believe that it's an intellectual system. I don't think it's an attempt to reduce a complex set of phenomena to something that is... dispenses with important elements of their existence. So for example, let me give you an example of how that sort of thing happens. If you're looking at the world through a biased lens, what it means is that you take non-random samples of the environmental data. So I can give you a quick example of something I saw that I thought was very particular in that regard. I don't think I've used this example before, but about ten years ago or thereabouts Naomi Klein made this documentary about this factory down in South America. I believe it was in Argentina. And this was just after all the foreign capital fled out of Argentina and the economy collapsed completely, which is something that happens to Argentina fairly regularly, by the way. And she went down there to this factory where there were working men and they had been building heavy machinery. And the working men had decided that they were going to... the factory had been padlocked and they had been locked out because things had come to a halt. And they had decided that they were going to take a chainsaw to the factory gate and go in there and start making heavy machinery again. And you know, it was a very cool documentary as far as I was concerned. She went down there and she interviewed all these working guys and they talked about how their lives had been brought to a halt by the factory closure. And obviously it sucked that they were sitting around doing nothing and not being paid for doing anything when they could've been inside the factory building heavy machinery, which is what they wanted to do. So she went down there and laid out their story and it was very sympathetic to the workers and good, you know, fair enough, good. But then she went and interviewed the guy who owned the factory and she didn't ask him any real questions. What she did instead was caricaturize him, even a priori, you know, as sort of a fascist capitalist, sort of like the millionaire in Monopoly, and never tried to get beneath the superficial a priori categorisation to find out what he actually thought. And I was just waiting, I thought, well this is cool, what the hell does the factory owner have to say? It's like, where did his money go, why does he think he has a right to the factory, like what are his conditions of ownership? Did he earn the money? Did he inherit it? It's like, what does he think about the fact that Argentina's economy has collapsed? How does he feel about the fact that all these workers are out of work? What does he think about the fact that they opened up the factory again? Like, there's a lot of interesting things to ask this guy. None of it, none of it happened. And so, to me what happened was that she was someone with neglect. You know, she was looking at the world but she could only see half of everything. And the half she saw was probably perfectly justifiable, had its proper domain of application, but the half she missed, well, what about that part of the story? You're going to reduce that to cliche and stereotype and expand up the rest of the story? Well, the only reason you'd do that is if you didn't want to find out what the hell was going on. If all you wanted to do was gather evidence that would support your initial theory. Now, I know perfectly well that there's plenty of situations where workers, the conditions of workers are absolutely abysmal. I mean, one of the books I've read that I think a remarkable documentation of that is a book by George Orwell called 'Road to Wigan Pier', which is a study of the conditions that coal miners lived in in the 1930s in Britain. And you know, it's bloody dismal. And the idea that they were exploited, well, that's a tougher one, because the Industrial Revolution was very, very hard on people, and it was really, really hard on some people. You know, particularly on some people. Whether that was because of exploitation or because of the existence of absolute poverty is not all that obvious. And you know... so it's a complicated issue. Now there's lots of times when workers were clearly exploited, but I think there are times as well when they weren't. Anyways, it's a great book, and he does a lovely job of laying out a rationale for why the workers should be treated far better than they were treated, and you know, so fine, good, wonderful. There's something to be said. But the thing is when you want to say something, you want to take an unbiased sample if you can, and so this is why I like this particular mode of conceptualisation, and I think it's... the reason I think it's not an intellectual construction is because I think it emerges naturally out of the structure of mythology and narrative, and you can think this through yourself, but as far I've been able to tell, narratives present themselves in terms of archetypal characters. And the thing about a comprehensive narrative is it can't leave out an archetypal character, or it fails. Now I can give you an example of this. So how many of you have seen Disney's 'Sleeping Beauty'? Okay, so many of you have. How many haven't? Okay, so there's a few that haven't. Well the Disney movies, you know they're kind of standard childhood fare. You know, in Sleeping Beauty, what happens is the King and Queen give birth to a princess after trying for a substantial amount of time. And she arrives healthy and beautiful, and then they have a christening day and they invite everybody to it. But they don't invite Maleficent, who's a dark witch, roughly speaking. You know, she's Queen of the Underworld, for lack of a better word. She's the negative element of femininity. And they don't invite her to the party. And so she shows up anyways, and says that because they didn't invite her, their daughter's going to die when she hits sixteen, which is roughly the age of let's say sexual maturation for a story of that sort. Now there's another little positive magic female in the story, who mitigates that death sentence to protracted sleep. Well the idea behind it, it's a very, very interesting story, it's an Oedipal story in a sense, because what it says is that if you're parents protect you too much from the dark side of life when you're young, what will happen when you start on the road to maturity is you'll be so naive and so fragile that you'll want to be unconscious instead of paying attention. And that you're going to have to be rescued from that state by something. And it could be a prince, which is how the story lays itself out, or it also could be the symbolically masculine and exploratory element of your own psyche. And the story's ambivalent about whether it's an external event or an internal event, it doesn't really matter. The things end up being the same. And so that's actually what happens in this Sleeping Beauty story. You know, at the end, a prince, who's also enslaved by this terrible negative feminine force, manages to escape, and Maleficent turns into a dragon and then he has to fight her, and then he goes and rescues the princess. And she wakes up and the kingdoms rejuvenate and everybody's happy. It's a classic, classic story. And it's not... it's funny because the Disney movie Frozen was put forward as a, in some sense as a feminist alternative to the classic fairy tales, but first of all you can't do that, you can't just generate up a fairy tale. You know, there's recent evidence that some of these fairy tales, the ones that the Grimm brothers and Hans Christian Andersen collected, are up to ten thousand years old. You can't just come up with a counter-fairy tale. That's just not how it works. And the way that a fairy tale is structured, it has nothing to do with the necessity for anyone to rely on anyone else for anything. It's a complex portrayal of the dynamic relationship between archetypal characters, and you know, it's one form of the story. There's lots of different forms of the story. But what I like about Sleeping Beauty for example, and this is what's nice about the real fairy tales, is that along with the positive there's negative, and it's real negative. Like real fairy tales are terrifying. I don't... who is it? Is it in Sleeping Beauty? Or Snow White? I don't remember. In one of the famous Grimm fairy tales, one of the evil sisters ends up dancing in red hot shoes till she dies. You know, it's... they're very, very violent and unsettling. And it's because they have the quality of genuine folk tales. But the reason for that is because they're dealing with real things. Like the Hansel and Gretel's story is a good example of that, right? Kids are abandoned out in the woods. They find something that's too good to be true. Inside this thing that's too good to be true is something that wants to fatten them up and devour them. It's a rough story. But what it's doing... the stories have evolved to represent the fundamental dynamic elements of existence, if you conceptualise existence in terms of character. And the thing is you have to conceptualise existence in terms of character if you're a person, because what you do in existence is act out your character. So your character is an element of existence. Now, you might say well that doesn't mean that society has a character. But actually, it does mean that. Because partly what happens... like if you're socialised, say, into a culture. The culture exists in the same relationship to you, roughly speaking, as another person does. So for example, if you put money in the bank, which is in principle a representation of your labour, what you're doing is entering into a contract with the broader social world, which is one of promise, essentially, where the future society promises to return your value at a future date. So it's a contractual relationship. And the reason that God the Father is a very common representation is because treating the 'they', in Heidegerrian terms, the others, in Heideggerian terms, as if they're an embodied entity, actually works. So it's because it is an emergent property of all of the personalities that make it up. And so you're interacting with that emergent personality all the time. You could even say for example, that that's the Freudian Id. It's the thing that... the representation of that inside you is what makes you feel guilty when you transgress against certain moral rules. And you might say, along with the radical existentialists, that that's just arbitrary and that you can create your own values, but it's not just arbitrary. Because it's dependent on the consent of others, as well as on some internal harmony or disharmony. It's not arbitrary. And you can't just set that up by yourself. So these things are realities and they're deep realities. Now, this particular portrayal indicates a kind of balance. So the fundamental ground of reality is neither positive nor negative, it's the ground out of which everything positive or negative emerges. So you might think of the fundamental ground of reality as that which exists prior to your encounter with it. And we have no idea what that is. Now you can think about it as... people tend to think about what things are made of in atomic terms but it's not a particularly comprehensive way of thinking about it. Because what exists beyond the realm of your comprehension is the patterned relationship between everything and everything. And you can't reduce it to any simple level of analysis because you miss all sorts of elements of it that are extraordinarily important if you do that. So you can't do that, that's not what experience is made out of, or what the grounded experience is made out of. And so it's neutral in some sense. Because it exists beyond your encounter with it. It's the unknown as such. And the reason that that's often represented in the form of a predatory lizard that has something to offer is precisely because of that. The absolute unknown has the capacity to tear you into pieces and burn you up, but it also has the possibility of rewarding you with everything you could possibly be rewarded with. So it's this strange juxtaposition of potential. I like to think about it as potential, you know, because people can get a grip on what potential means. There's potential everywhere, whatever that is. You have potential, your parents tell you that all the time. What is that? Well, it's the unrealised stuff of your being. Now it's a very strange concept, potential, because you can't characterise it any way that you would characterise something that's real. Because it's not real, it's potential. But you act like it's real. You know, you'll feel guilty that you're not living up to your potential, you're not manifesting your potential. You want people to interact with you so that they allow you to demonstrate your potential. You act as if it's a reality continually. You think as if it's a reality continually. You ask if your relationship has potential, you know. But it's a very, very strange substance, whatever this potential is. It's unrealised possibility, essentially, but you regard it as something that's fluid and something that can develop in all sorts of different directions, and something whose development you can shape. Because otherwise why would you feel guilty, you know? It's like, if you're doing the wrong thing, you're realising some potential in the wrong way, and then you feel bad about that. It's like, well, there's some sense of intrinsic morality operating at the bottom of that. We've talked a lot about that. Some of that's built in biologically, some of it is structured culturally, some of it is a consequence of you trying to organise your... this plethora of semi-beings that you are into some integrated manner. Like it's a very, very complicated thing. It's not just arbitrary. Okay so that's the very background, the dragon of chaos, positive and negative. And it's the thing out of which everything springs. If you look at the Scandinavian world tree, for example, or world trees in general, you very frequently have a representation of a serpent that's associated with them. The reason that the... that potential is serpentine is extraordinarily complicated, but I think it's partly because, say snakes shed their own skin, so they can be reborn, so they're a symbol of transformation. And then they're sneaky and subtle and so they appear in places that you wouldn't necessarily expect them to, and then they're a terrible, terrible threat. In overcoming that threat, you also develop. So not only are they a threat, but they're the kind of threat that makes you become strong when you face it. And that's partly why the snake is such an ambivalent figure in most mythology. Okay, so that's complicated, but we'll return to that later. And then out of that, you might say, emerges the unknown as you encounter it. So there's potential itself, and then the first layer of potential are the things that you encounter that you don't understand. So I can give you an example of that. So let's say you're a three-year-old, or a two-year-old, that's better, and you're in the kitchen and a mouse runs across the room. And so you track it because your eyes pick up the movement, and you track the thing. And then it's an unexpected occurrence, so you don't know what it signifies, right. So that's the emergence of something tangibly unknown into your conceptual space. Now it's not like you lack any knowledge of it. You can tell what its size is, and you can get some estimation of its speed. And I think what you have to do when you think about whether or not something is unknown is you have to think about it in relationship to that hierarchy of perception that I keep throwing at you. You know, if something emerges... if you encounter an entity and you can map it at every single level of your value hierarchy, then it's known. You know how to interact with it at a micro-level, and you know what its implications are for every other level of your conceptual being. You know what its implications are for the future. Like you know exactly how to deal with that thing, it's mapped at every single level. There's other things that are only mapped at one level and not at others. So maybe the mouse, we'll say, for the child who's never seen a mouse, it's like... it shares some commonalities with objects that the child is familiar with. But there's sufficient novelty so that it's also contaminated with the unknown, and that makes the child, basically, semi-startled and alert. Now the child will immediately refer to an adult, and it's a technical term, actually, they'll look at the adult's face because the adult broadcasts the motivational affective significance of that event. And so the child looks, references, and then reads off the face (and of course the speech and the bodily actions) exactly what that thing signifies. And then if the person that they're looking at jumps up on the table and screams, then that's one sense of meaning, which is 'God, this thing is magical, it's only this big and look at what effect it has on, you know, my aunt (for the sake of argument), who's you know, a pretty competent creature as far as I can tell, being two years old'. And then if she just dismisses it, you know, her actions are going to determine the meaning of that phenomenon. So that's how the transformation of the semi-known thing into the more-known thing occurs. It occurs almost always in a social context. You can explore things by yourself, but you rarely actually do that by yourself. It's almost always you plugged into a social apparatus, you know. So you might be doing the specific investigating, but the social apparatus is around you so that you can confer with it, and it also shapes the way that you're going to interact with that specific thing. Okay, so the unknown, that's generally... the unknown that you encounter, that's generally characterised using feminine symbolism. And I think the reason for that, there's a bunch of reasons, and we talked about many of them. One reason is because females do the sexual selection in human beings, and so they act as the face of nature. Another reason is that you can think of new possibility always emerging out of the non-cultural background, in some sense. So for example, let's say that we send an expedition to Mars, and we're gathering new information as a consequence. The reason we're gathering new information is because we've gone out past the domain of our knowledge, in a sense, and we're interacting with something new. And in that interaction, new information is generated. Now you can say that it's partly the act of the perceiver that's generating the new information, and you can say that it's partly the act of the culture. Because we sent robots to Mars, let's say, which is very, very difficult. So the culture goes there but the individuals are observing, so the individuals are buttressed by the culture. But they're generating information because they're somewhere truly new. And so the information... the unknown is a constant source of new information. So it's a place that gives birth to new information. And so that's another part of the reason that it seems to be symbolised in feminine form. You know, I'm just taking this, in some sense, as an empirical fact. I've looked at... it looks like that's how these stories work. And so I've been trying to puzzle out why exactly that would be the case. I also think it's the case that we tend to look at the world from a social cognitive perspective. We filter it through a social, cognitive, biological apparatus. And so we're very likely to see things in character form, and characters have sexes, and so that's going to happen. And then which, the attributes of femininity or the attributes of masculinity, that get used as symbolic reference in some sense, there's an arbitrariness involved. So for example, for the Egyptians... you know, usually have a sky god, but they had a sky goddess. Now, she usually represents the night sky, which is not exactly the same thing as the day sky, but you have to... it's so tricky because you have to look at the relationships between the characters in order to decide what all of them mean, and that shifts a little bit from story to story. So this is a, what would you say, it's an approximation of the underlying structure, but there's a fair bit of variation in it, just like there's variance in stories. Well the feminine element has a destructive element and a creative aspect. And you can see that people characterise their environments in that way. So for example, you can map on environmental beliefs onto this structure. You can say that the environmentalist portrays nature as positive, portrays culture as negative, and portrays the individual as negative. And the basic story is rampaging individual as member of rapacious culture invading the pristine landscape of beautiful Mother Nature. Now the thing about that story is it's true. The problem with that story is that it's half true. So for example, one thing that's interesting to conceptualise is that that's exactly the opposite of the frontier myth. Now the frontier myth was a story that was used extensively in Europe to drive immigration into the United States. And it was used to some degree in Canada too. And so the story was the exact opposite. It's the hero, so that would be the immigrant pioneer, bringing the benefits of order to a savage wilderness. Well that's also true, but it's so interesting that both of those things can be true, and they're completely different from one another. There's no commonality at all between those two stories, except for the way that they use the characters. There's a feminine character, a masculine character (that represents culture), and then there's another character that represents the individual. And you could even see that, if you think about it historically, the US was founded in some sense on the frontier myth, and that was to one side. And so by the time the 1960s came along, the early 1960s, it shifted to its opposite. And you need that, because systems have to oscillate to some degree to remain stable across time. They can't just be fixed in place. So they're going to play back and forth through the archetypes in an attempt to keep them balanced because that's what you're trying to do, you're trying to keep them balanced. And so, you have the destructive and creative element of Mother Nature. You see that all the time in movies where the thing that the hero is striving against is the negative element of the unknown. How many of you have seen the movie 'Alien'? Okay so that's a pretty graphic representation of, well those aliens were more reptilian in form, so they're almost like... they're more at the dragon of chaos level of civilisation, but they're a terrible external force that's threatening human culture and the individual. It's exactly the opposite story that's played out in... what was the movie with all the blue creatures? Avatar, right. Avatar is exactly the opposite of that, where you know, the unknown nature is just nothing but sweetness and bliss. And the culture is portrayed as spear-headed by greedy and rapacious individuals who are basically manifestations of the military industrial complex. The funny thing is that those both made good stories. And that's because... well, it's because they have enough archetypal truth so that there's many situations that they're relevant to. You know, sometimes Mother Nature is your best friend, and sometimes it's your worst enemy. And so you could go down to the jungles of Peru, and you could talk to the people who live there, and you could find out what they know about medicinal plants in the jungle, and you could bring home things to cure disease. Or you could just go down there and get lost in the jungle and then you're dead. You know in some sense it's the same jungle. And whether it's positive or negative depends on what stance you take towards it and how you behave. And so the other thing that's really interesting about mythology, and this is the lovely element of mythology, is that part of what it does is tell you how to take this incredibly complex landscape that's positive and negative at the same time, at every level of analysis, and how to navigate through it so that the proper balance is maintained as far as the entire system is concerned. So the culture has an orderly element, and that's what protects us here, and it has a tyrannical element, and that's what makes you treated like numbers at the University of Toronto. You know, you get both of those at exactly the same time. And then the archetypal individual has the same fundamental nature. Hero or villain. And you know those have archetypal roots, because the ultimate hero is the ultimate, perfect person. And the ultimate villain is Satan himself, in whatever form he happens to take. It doesn't take much knowledge of the structure before you can see it manifested all over, especially in movies that are particularly popular, because they almost always have a central archetypal theme. The Marvel superhero movies are a really good example of that. And if it's complex literature, the archetypes are mixed to some degree. So you have a hero who's not only a hero, you have a hero who has all sorts of flaws. And he's in a culture, or she's in a culture, that has positive elements and negative elements and they're in a broader landscape that's characterised by exactly the same thing. So it's nuanced. And the more sophisticated you get, the more you can tolerate that kind of nuance. And I think that's also one of the things... that's partly why literature is such a good antidote to ideology. Because the more sophisticated the literature becomes, the more complex, and fragmented in some sense, or differentiated, the more differentiated the archetypal landscape becomes. So when someone tells you a story, whatever the story happens to be, one of the things you can do when you know the substructures, is you can say 'okay yeah, but where are the missing pieces? Where are they going?' Because if they're not included then they're generally projected onto something. Because they're there, you can't get away from them, they're there. How does the person account for them? Alright, so now I want to tell you another story. So we talked about the Mesopotamian creation myth last week, and now I want to tell you about the Egyptian myth of sovereignty. And so, the first thing I should do is say that all of the stories that I'm talking to you about have all sorts of variance. And so, the Egyptian story that I'm going to describe lasted for thousands and thousands of years, and so it isn't like there was only one variation of it, there's all sorts of variations of it, and I'm only going to tell you one of them. And that's a limitation, but that's just how it is for the time being. So I'm not saying that this is the only version of this story. But it's a version, and it's the one I'm most familiar with, and so I can talk about it, hopefully with some utility. And it's a great story. When I finally figured out what it meant... it's so cool, with some of these stories if you crack them, and you're able to see what they mean, they're absolutely overwhelming. They're so bloody brilliant, it's no wonder that people regard them as revelatory, you know, of divine origin, because they have such power that it's almost impossible to imagine how that could've got there. Now, I provide you with the Darwinian explanation of how that got there, right, because the stories are representations of social contracts and behavioural tendencies that have evolved over thousands and thousands of years. Because of that, the representation, the story's going to have way more information in it than a typical story might. But I still can understand how these things burst upon people with the force of revelation. One of the things that's quite interesting too, if you look at cultures historically, is that you usually find that the revelation of the story... it's like the energy source on which the culture feeds. So the story comes first, it has this tremendous dynamic energy. The culture basically uses that energy to propel itself through time, you know, to give itself conviction and force. And then at some point the story exhausts itself, and that would be equivalent, in some sense, I suppose, to Nietzsche's announcement of the death of God. And this has happened many times. Alright, so there's four main characters in the Egyptian story. There's Osiris, Isis, Set, and Horus. Now, Osiris, we'll start with Osiris, but you could start with any of the characters, because one of the things that's quite interesting about mythology is that the myths don't make any distinction between the causal priority of these characters. Any of them can be regarded as fundamental. So the hero is the person who separates the world parents for example, and brings being into existence. But you can also say well it's Tiamat, which is more how the Mesopotamian creation myth is tilted, or you can say you can't make sense out of anything unless you have a cultural lens through which you're looking. Like there has to be some pre-existent structure before information can be generated in any manner. So you're always stuck with this problem, that in order for something to exist you need a substrate, you need an interpretive substructure, and you need an interpreter. And you can't say that one of those thing precedes the other. They all have to be there at the same time. You could say from a Darwinian perspective, they all emerged and complexified in unison as time progressed. It doesn't explain how the origin originated, however. Okay, so you've got Osiris. Now Osiris is the founder of the Egyptian state. And so, you know, before people wrote things down, you have to kind of try to understand how it was that they remembered things. Their memory was more like an amalgam, or a gist. So we already know that if you tell the story of your actions yesterday that it doesn't take you 16 hours to tell the story. Hopefully it takes you like five minutes. And why that is is not obvious, but part of the reason is, for whatever underlying reasons, you know what parts of the story are relevant to other people, and what parts aren't. So basically what you're going to do is try not to tell them things they already know. Because that would just be pointless. And in order to do that you more or less have to know what they know and what they don't know. And you have to more or less stay on the edge of that. But you can do that. Well, I might ask you, well what did you do over the last three months, or I could say what have you done for the last couple of years? And in each case you're going to collapse that into some representation. Now imagine that the problem you're trying to solve is 'what did your culture try to do for the last five thousand years?' Well imagine that there are... the culture in part is being continually informed by the individuals that compose it. And there're going to be different individuals of different stature who discover things of different importance. And we often know some people like that. We know of Thomas Edison, for example, and we can name actual people. But that's in part because we write things down and have records of them. You can imagine though that you're trying to represent your history in a way that you can remember. You're going to tell stories about people who have done interesting things, because that's what you even when you tell a story about yourself. So imagine you tell one story about someone who did something interesting and then you tell another story about someone else who did something interesting, and so forth. And that's continually going on, let's say, in a tribal or archaic culture. So then what you get is a set of stories about people doing interesting things. Well, it's easy for that to shift into the ancestors doing interesting things. And then it's easy for that to shift into the ancestor doing wonderful things. And that's basically what happens, is that you get the emergence of the culture story, which is something like a small set of cultural heroes who have done all the things that are worth doing. And what you're doing is imitating them. And you know, this is... you know, your empirical memory of events only lasts about a hundred years. Because there isn't anyone old enough to remember anything past that. And so what has to happen is that everything that happened before that has to be collapsed into some form that's memorable, so that it can be brought forward and taught, and that's the function of these stories. These stories actually... it's almost as if the story has abandoned everything that hasn't stuck in people's memories. And so all that's left is the most significant... is the most significance. Because otherwise why would people bother with it? They wouldn't tell the story, they wouldn't be gripped by it. Okay, so Osiris, he's one of these figures. You could think... if you allowed people to tell stories of George Washington, say, and Abe Lincoln, and all the semi-mythologised founders of the United States, if you allowed people, in the absence of textbooks and writing, to tell stories about those men for the next thousand years, maybe what you'd get out of that is an origin story of the mythic founder of the state. And that seems to be what's happened in the Egyptian case with Osiris. Now he's a god, but he's got human characteristics. And so he's also granted the status of something that's eternal. Okay now, here's the story of Osiris, roughly speaking. He's kind of old now, and he's a little bit blind, but he's blind in a specific way. And the way that he's specifically blind is that he's wilfully blind. Now if you're wilfully blind about... the Egyptians say this straightforwardly, and I'll tell you why they believe this. If you're wilfully blind there's things that you could know that you take pains not to know. And wilful blindness, under English common law, can be grounds for criminal conviction. So for example, if you run a company and you think that your treasurer is cooking the books but it's working to your favour, and you decide 'well, I just won't look', and then later it comes out, you could say 'well I didn't know', and the people who are prosecuting would say 'yeah but you could have known and you took a conscious choice not to know, so you're culpable.' And I think that's actually the best model of Freudian repression, in a sense. It isn't exactly repression, it is failure to make the effort to know something that you could know. Now, sometimes you... look, sometimes something terrible happens to you and you just can't understand it. But sometimes something terrible is happening and you refuse to think about it. And because you refuse to think about it you really don't know what it is. And you might say, 'well I can't be culpable then because I don't know what it is', but you could have known, so you're culpable. So it's voluntary ignorance. And that's the problem with Osiris. He was a great guy when he was young, he was a hero. He founded the Egyptian state. But you know he's not everything he could be anymore. He's gotten anachronistic and outdated and wilfully blind, which is even worse. Now there's an idea here. It's such a bloody brilliant idea, it's mindboggling. So Osiris is the state manifested in personified form, and that's reasonable, because the state is like a person. The person of the state is manifested in the body of laws, and you guys all imitate that body of laws, and that's what basically makes you citizens of the state. So that's what makes you citizens of the state. You can all get along because all of you are imitating the same thing, and what you're imitating is the central body of custom and law that makes up the state. And that's why you can predict each other. So that makes you a good citizen. Now the problem with being a good citizen is that sometimes if you're a good citizen you're a bad person. That's a big problem. So for example, the better you were at being a Nazi, in all likelihood, the worse a person you were. And so that's a very useful observation, because one of the things it shows is that even though it's necessary for you to imitate the central personality of the state, sometimes the central personality of the state can be pathological. And the Egyptians, who had established quite a lengthy state (as opposed, say, to the Mesopotamians... the Egyptians had been existing in a complex state apparatus for a very long period of time), they started to encounter problems that were intrinsic to the state. Now you remember, in the Mesopotamian creation myth, the primary danger was Tiamat. You know, you make a lot of racket, you kill Apsu, that's order, Tiamat comes flooding back and takes you out. Well you can imagine that that would be the primary story of people in a civilisation that was somewhat fragile. They're a hell of a lot more worried about being invaded by the next, you know, round of barbarians, or having their crops fail, or being flooded out or something like that, than they are concerned about whether or not the whole state apparatus has become corrupt and is going to collapse. Now they're partly concerned about that, because remember Marduk, the emperor, is supposed to be being a good Marduk and keeping an eye on everything. But the myth, the mythic structure only talks about Apsu a tiny little bit, it basically says 'don't kill Tiamat's consort or you'll make her angry'. The Egyptians take that a lot farther. They look at Osiris and they say 'well he was... there was something really good about him. Without him we wouldn't even have our state, so we bloody well better be happy about that, because the state is better than no state'. You know, you could say pathological order is better than absolute chaos. Now you can have an argument about that but... whatever, it's, you know, it depends on how pathological the order, obviously. But it isn't that untrammeled chaos is a good solution. I think that you can, and I'm only using this as an example... you know, the Americans, and us as well, went into Iraq to take out a person who was clearly a dictator. And who had... who was a pretty bad guy and who had really bad sons. And his heroes were people like Stalin and Hitler. Well, they took him out. Well then what? Well, then all hell broke loose. You know, because the theory was, you take out the bad guy at the top and all the good guys at the bottom get together and instantly they have a good government. It's like, that isn't what happened at all, what happened was the whole state degenerated into chaos. And partly out of that chaos came ISIS, and it's not self-evident that ISIS is preferable to Hussein. At least Hussein educated all the women, and he was relatively secular, all things considered. So I'm not making a case for Hussein, my point is that, you know, you have to be careful when you disrupt order, even when it's pathological, because God only knows what's going to spring forth. And that doesn't mean that you should never try to overcome pathological order, but it does mean that you should be very, very careful when you do so. You know, you have to do a micro-analysis in some sense to make sure that you know what the hell you're doing. Alright so anyways, Osiris, he's a good guy man, he established the state, he was a great guy, he was a hero, he, you know, made order out of chaos, and that's where you live, so great. But he's a little old, a little out of date, and he's wilfully blind, and that's so smart because I think what the Egyptians did is encapsulate in narrative form the primary danger of all human institutions. There's two of them. And Eliade talks about this a lot with regards to flood mythology. So here's an example. There are flood myths all over the world, and there may have even been a flood, there's pretty good archeological evidence for that, that there was a great flood about 13,000 years ago, when a bunch of comets hit the Earth and melted the North American ice shield, but we won't get into that. But it doesn't really matter, because the mythological sub-structure of the story still has the same meaning regardless of its historical reality. So in the Biblical story of the flood, basically what happens is that humanity is created, then they degenerate rapidly. And they get so degenerate, which is sort of like the elder Gods getting out of hand in the Mesopotamian story, that God thinks, 'oh to hell with all of you, you're a big mistake, I'm just going to wipe you out'. But he finds one good guy, that's Noah, and out of Noah, who's like another Adam, in some sense, the world of human beings is regenerated. But the idea is that corrupt people get washed away. And Eliade talks about the flood myth all over the world, Mircea Eliade, and he says that generally speaking there's two reasons why the deities flood the planet. And one is the system is old and out-dated, and the second is that people are corrupt. And then if you get the two things working together, you get a system that's out of date that becomes pathological faster because people are corrupt. And so I think that you can use the flood in New Orleans as a good example of that. Because on the one hand you can say, well it was a hurricane. So that's a natural disaster. But on the other hand you could say, well people knew the damn dykes were too weak, and they didn't do anything about it, you know, they were only built for a hundred year storm. And Louisiana is corrupt beyond belief, I mean, for a democratic state, it's not corrupt compared to most states, but it's really corrupt compared to most democratic states, and if you dump money into Louisiana it just goes into people's pockets anyways and the infrastructure doesn't get fixed up. So then you might ask yourself, well was the flood a consequence of a natural disaster, or the blindness of the culture? Well, you can never tell which of those are true. If you freeze to death in the winter is it because it's cold or because you're stupid? You know, there's no difference between those two things. So if you get wiped out, it's because nature comes after you and because your culture isn't sufficient to protect. And so you can't separate those two things. Okay, so... now the other case that the Egyptians are making, and this is quite cool, is that if you take a system that's doing just fine, and you just leave it alone long enough, it becomes dysfunctional. And there is a bunch of reasons for that. I mean, you know, you can imagine that you take your laptop, and it's in perfect working order, and you put it in the closet for twenty years, and you take it out, what do you have? Well, it'll still turn on. Do you have a laptop? Well no, by then it won't even work, it won't be able to communicate with the internet, there won't be any peripherals that could plug into it, the software would be so outdated that you wouldn't even know how to use it. Like it's a brick, basically. And so the point is that, and you can really see this with electronic equipment, a perfectly functional thing, maintained in stasis, of its own accord becomes dysfunctional. And so what that means is that you have to run around like a mad hyena just keeping your things working. Now of course you know that, because how much time do you spend in a month updating your electronics? You know, it's just a treadmill of updates. I think part of the reason they haven't contributed to overall productivity is because people take all the time they used to waste typing things out on paper trying to keep their efficient electronics actually working. And you know, learning all the things you have to learn and re-learning them. There's this scene in Alice in Wonderland. So Alice is in the Underworld, right? And she meets the Red Queen down there. So that's Mother Nature. And she's always running around going 'off with their heads! Off with their heads!' in an arbitrary way, which is of course what the Red Queen does. And at one point she tells Alice, which is such a... it's such a remarkably deep line, she says to Alice 'in my Kingdom you have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place.' And that's exactly right. So you can think, the environment that you're trying to adapt to is a dynamic concatenation of patterns and it's transforming across time. Not completely unpredictably, but certainly not predictably. And so that means if you build a structure that's adapted to it, that structure has to change and flow in keeping with the change and flow of the underlying environment or it gets outdated. You know, it gets obsolescent. And so all you have to do is sit there and do nothing and you become obsolescent. And so that's the problem with Osiris being old. He was a good guy when he was young, but he's old now, and the old solutions don't solve the new problems. And you could call that an Egyptian existential statement. All of you have a culture. It's old. It doesn't apply. Or it doesn't apply well. And so what are you going to do with it? Are you going to throw the whole thing out? Well we know what happens, the Mesopotamians already told us what happens if you do that. It's like, Tiamat comes flooding back and all hell breaks loose, so you can't throw everything away, but it doesn't work very well, so it's up to you to figure out how to fix it. Okay so... but now Osiris has got another problem. So you might say... well let's say you've got an old computer (this, by the way points to computer , in case you haven't noticed, is a very old computer), and if you keep tapping on it, and upgrading it a little bit, you could keep it more or less up-to-date. At some point you're going to throw the whole damn thing away. But you could do incremental changes to it on a continual basis, and the thing will more or less stay functional. You could think about those incremental changes as partial revolutions, right? Remember that hierarchy. Now and then you have to change the operating system. That sucks, because that means everything operating underneath virtually has to change. But more often you're doing a tweak here and a tweak there, at lower, more specific levels, and if you tweak enough then the probability that the whole thing is going to collapse and you'll have to do a clean install is quite low. Well the same thing applies to the state, logically enough. This is the state. If you think that your laptop isn't the state then you're not thinking about your laptop properly. It's the state. And it's going to be more and more the state as we progress over the next twenty years. So you know that if you're aware and you keep the updates up and you stay awake that you can keep the thing functioning. At some point it's going to get anachronistic, it's better to just replace it, which is also by the way what's going to happen to all of you, right? And it's a decision that evolution, in some sense, and biology has made, that at some point trying to keep you updated is so bloody complicated that you might as well get rid of the whole thing and let something new occur, and I'm really dead serious about this, because death evolved. You know, you have elements in you that are three and a half billion years old. Not everything dies. And some creatures are functionally immortal. But not us. And the reason is, well at some point we're too old to be updated, and so that's the end of that. Seems to happen about over a hundred year period. Anyways, now imagine you just ignore your computer completely. You don't update the thing at all. Well, it's going to get anachronistic of its own accord, but if you refuse to engage in those operations that would keep it updated, it's going to get anachronistic a lot faster. And that's what happens to Osiris, they say the same thing. It's like, he's old, and that's part of the problem, he's past his prime. But the worst part of the problem is that he's wilfully blind. He won't take action even though he knows it's necessary. And so he gets out of date and pathological faster than necessary. Now when you hear in the flood stories that God is angry about the sins of men, and that's why He washes everything away, it's the same idea. Now the word 'sin' comes from the Greek word hamartia, and hamartia is an archery term. And to sin means not to hit the centre of the target. And so basically the idea in the flood stories is that if enough people aren't aiming at the target, or hitting the centre, then things are going to get so corrupt and unstable that everything is going to get washed away. And that's right, it's exactly, perfectly accurate. Which is very, very cool. It's remarkable that that's the case. Okay, so now Osiris (because this is a myth) has an evil brother. Now that's a pretty common occurrence. If you look at The Lion King (which is very much the Egyptian creation myth, by the way), the Lion King... what's the old guy's name? The old lion. Mufasa. He has a brother, right? What's his brother? Scar! And what's the problem with Scar? He's scarred. Right, so you know, he says he's from the bottom of the gene pool. And you know, he's been in second place all his life, and he's very, very intelligent. He worships his own intelligence. He regards himself as a higher form of intellect, which is a very common characteristic of evil brother is mythology, and there's a reason for that. And he's scarred because life has scarred him. And he's bitter and resentful and he wants to bring down the order and he wants to kill the son of the king. I mean, he's a bad guy. Now the problem is that Mufasa underestimates him, and that's exactly what happens to Osiris. So Osiris has this brother, Set, or Seth. And I've a sneaking suspicion that our word 'set', for setting Sun is from that word, although I don't know that for sure. But sounds are generally... sounds in language remain stable across a very long period of time, and set was definitely, from the Egyptian perspective, the enemy of the Sun. You know, that's part of the Egyptian cosmology. And the Sun is associated with illumination and brightness and daytime consciousness and clear apprehension and vision, and all those things. And of course night is opposed to that, unconsciousness and blindness and danger, and all of those things. So anyways, Set, he's pretending to be Osiris's loving brother, but he's not. He's plotting to overthrow him first chance he gets. And so he's just sitting in the background, feeding him bad advice, waiting for him to get weak enough so that he can strike. Now the name Set is taken by the Egyptian Coptics and turned into Satan. So Set is the precursor of the Christian Satan. So the reason I'm telling you that is so that you can see how these ideas, these archetypal ideas of corruption and evil are extraordinarily ancient, and they're part of the process whereby people are trying to figure out what the right way is to act and what the wrong way is to act, and what the right way is to set up institutions and what the wrong way is to set up institutions. So it's a very, very long process. And it's not something that someone just sat around and thought up. It's way, way deeper than that. So anyways, Osiris is being, you know, getting weaker and being blind, and one day Set thinks 'alright, time for action', so he takes his brother and he chops him up into little pieces. Now, Osiris is a god, so you're not going to kill him, but you can make it very difficult for him to get his act together. So basically what happens is Osiris falls apart. Now think about that. You fall apart. People say that. The relationship fell apart. I fell apart. Things fall apart. What does that mean? Well it means that a thing is usually a complex unity of multiple sub-entities, and sometimes what holds them together, the superordinate structure, collapses, and all that's left are the things. Because you know, when you fall apart, you don't completely fall apart. You know, you're still alive. What's happened is that the unity of your psychological structure has been fragmented. And that's a trip to the underworld, man. So you're going to be unhappy. I broke up with my partner and then I fell apart. Well everyone knows what that means. Okay, so that's what happens to Osiris. Things fall apart. So then Set, being a sneaky sort of character, takes all of Osiris's pieces and he puts them all over Egypt. He hides them here and there so that Osiris is going to have a hell of a time recollecting himself and getting his act together and coming back. And so, things fall apart. Now the same thing happens in The Lion King, obviously, because Scar kills Mufasa. So fine, then Set rules. That's not a good day for the Egyptians. Remember what happens in The Lion King when Scar rules? The environment becomes completely devastated because they overhunt, right? So you get total environmental devastation. It's all black and burnt. And, you know, nothing is functioning properly. And remember after Simba comes back to set things right it starts to rain and everything comes back to life. Well it's another indication of the idea that you really can't separate the environment from the culture, you know, they're in a dynamic system of interaction. Anyways, Osiris, things have fallen apart. Well Osiris has a wife, he has to, he's King of Order. Well, we're missing someone, we're missing the Queen of Chaos, we're missing the Queen of the Underworld. That's Isis. Now Isis was a long-lasting goddess. There's been goddess religions forever. There's an idea among misinformed feminist anthropologists that the original religious structures were feminine, earth-goddess type religions, and then they were replaced by patriarchal religions. And there's no historical evidence for that. And the best work I know on that is actually through the Jungians... Jung and Eric Neumann. Because what they figured out... they're kind of on the same track, thinking about the same idea, that there seems to be a shift between matriarchal values to patriarchal values, and that that was a historical shift. But what they actually found out instead was that's a shift in mythological idea. It's not a historical reality. And it's useful as a mythological idea but you shouldn't project it backwards onto time and make it a historical reality. Anyways, Isis, she's been Queen of the Underworld forever. Now of course, when order collapses, chaos reappears, and that's what happens. Isis pops up out of the Underworld and her husband's missing and she's not very happy about that. So she wanders all over Egypt looking for his phallus. And so... now that's an interesting idea, because it touches on the biology of innovation, in some sense. So you've heard of the notion of a seminal idea. Well, that's a mythologically informed metaphor. And so the idea is that, in biological reproduction, semen falls on fertile ground, and out of that something emerges. Well, there's a tight analogue between that and what happens in the Egyptian myth with regards to sexuality. Now, Jung and Freud had a big argument about this, eh, because Freud thought that you could reduce everything to sexuality. And Jung said no no, what you don't understand is that sexuality itself is often used as a symbol for something even more profound. And they didn't agree on that, and that's part of why they went their separate ways. Freud was very much unwilling to believe that religion could be anything other than a set of defensive and repressive beliefs and practices designed to protect you from death anxiety. That was basically his hypothesis. And it's wrong. I mean, there is that element, of course, because you can use dogma to protect yourself against all sorts of things. But you can't reduce a whole damn thing to that. You have got to watch people of any type, that are intellectuals, who will tell you that everything can be reduced to one cause. You know, it's like a misplaced monotheism. Lots of people do that. For Marx it's economics or class warfare, for Freud it's sexuality (although he also considers aggression), for Foucault it's power. You know, it's like no, it's not that simple. You can make a good story out of those motivations, because they're powerful motivations, and they do affect everything, but that doesn't mean they cause everything uni-dimensionally. Okay, so anyways, Isis pops up, Queen of the Underworld, Set takes control, chaos emerges from the Underworld, Isis wanders around, she finds Osiris's phallus, and she makes herself pregnant. Well, so what does that mean? Well, it means a lot of things. One thing it means is that if a great system falls apart, the parts still have life. And, you know, you could think about that. People often talk about the stability (to the degree that it's stable)... part of the stability of capitalism is its creative destruction. Capitalism allows great enterprises to collapse and disperse. But they don't break down into sub-atomic particles, right? They collapse but the pieces they collapse into still have life, some of them more than others. And then if something collapses, sometimes part of the thing that collapsed has enough life to build something new out of the pieces. That's the same thing that happens to you when you undergo a radical, revolutionary transformation in your character. You might even feel like you're dying. And in some sense the organising principles by which you lived are dying. That's what's taking you out. And it's painful. Those things are alive. It's no trivial matter to be taken apart. But you know, you hope that you get taken apart, you can find some new information down there in the chaos, and that's your union with Isis, roughly speaking. And out of that union of information from the chaos and the parts of you that are left, you could come springing back. And everyone hopes that, and often it's the case. You know, one of the lessons you can derive from Egyptian mythology is bloody well stay awake. And make the little corrections when you need to. Don't be wilfully blind, because if you're wilfully blind you're going to store up chaos, because you're not keeping it at bay. And then one day when you're weak it's just going to take you out. And that happens. That happens to people all the time. They let things around them degenerate back into chaos. And then one day they're weak, and something else comes along to hit them, and they're done. They can't get up. It's too heavy and too hard a hit. And so then they're down in the Underworld and they stay there. The general rule is if you're going to go to the Underworld, it's better to go on purpose and for short voyages. And that's the idea behind voluntary exposure, right? Find out what you don't want to look at. It's easy enough to do that, because you're going to see yourself avoiding it. Then figure out how you can approach it and order some of it, in as big chunks as you can manage. And you can do that all the time. Stay awake. Because then you keep your infrastructure properly maintained, and the probability that you will tolerate a powerful blow is much, much higher. It's not certain. That's the other thing about myths. They tell you the best way to negotiate through life, but they never tell you that that will work. They just tell you that that's your best bet. And so yeah, maybe that's enough. It might be enough. Okay, anyways, so Isis finds Osiris's phallus, and gets pregnant. And then back to the Underworld she goes. And she goes through her pregnancy and she gives birth to Horus. Now that's a pretty common story, right? That's the long lost rightful king. You know, in King Arthur, for example, Arthur has to be taken away from the castle to be raised, basically in isolation. It's a very, very common story. And the reason... the same thing happens Harry Potter, right? Harry Potter is stuck with these Dursleys and they just... they're like every resentful child's image of their parents. Maybe it's more like every resentful 13-year-old's image of their parents. And you know, the truth of the matter is that you are kind of stuck off in the normative wastelands of your culture. You have your specific parents, they're not archetypal representatives of reality, they're your parents. They're nature and culture, but in finite and flawed human form. And what that means in part is you are raised outside the domain of your culture. It's old, it isn't working very well, and it's not transmitted very well to you. So you grow up outside of it, you're alienated from it. That's that existential alienation, but people have always felt alienated from their damn culture, because it's old, and it's sort of blind. And there you are young and dynamic and full of life and all it's telling you is you can do this and you can't do that. And then you know, lying to you about some things, and doing a pretty nasty job of others. So you're outside it, you're alienated from it. And that's what happens to Horus. He's outside, in the Underworld. That's where he gets born. And so that's worth thinking about too. Anyways, he grows up. Now Horus is an interesting sort of character. So you've all seen the image of the Egyptian eye, right? Everyone knows that image. Even now, which is pretty cool. So it's got an eyebrow and it's got an eye in the middle and then it's got the iris, and usually the pupil is so big that it covers the whole iris. And there's a variety of reasons for that, but one of the reasons is that it symbolises interest and attention. So when you're interested in something, your pupil grows. And so Horus's pupil is really big, and he's checking things out like mad. So Horus is the eye, and he's also a falcon. And you might say, well why is he a falcon? And the answer to that is falcons are birds of prey, and they can really see. So that's another amplification of the idea of the eye. Now falcons fly up above everything, even above the pyramids. And they can see wherever they want to see, and so Horus is the thing that flies up above the structures of mankind, in some sense, and can see them panoramically. So he's not encapsulated in any particular pyramid, he's the thing that's above all pyramids and looking and providing you with an overview. And I think the best way to conceptualise Horus in modern terms is attention. That's not thought, that's a whole different thing. Like attention is what thought... attention is the precursor to thought, in some sense. Attention is where you meet meaning, and that's another way of thinking about it. Attention is actually where you take undifferentiated chaos and start to turn it into order. And you think about... how much do you like being paid attention to? People love that. Children, you don't pay attention to them, they become pathological. You don't pay attention to your partner, your relationship dissolves. No one pays attention to you, you crawl off in a corner and die. Advertisers pay for your attention. Like attention, that's a currency, man, that's value. And you like to be paid attention to when you do good things, and maybe you'll even do terrible things so that someone pays attention to you. Attention's a big deal. We don't understand it very well. But anyways, the Egyptians conceptualised it as a god. And that's smart, that's a very smart idea. Anyways, Horus grows up in the Underworld, and then when he gets kind of big and ready to contend with the world, he thinks I'm going to take the damn state back from my evil uncle. Well, that's what you're supposed to do. You're supposed to grow up, pay attention, get yourself the hell out of the Underworld, and then take your state back from your evil uncle. Okay, so what happens? So Horus, he gets himself all prepared. And he's son of Order and Chaos, man, he's no second-rate character. You remember... how many of you have seen The Avengers movies? Okay. Okay so I think it's Samuel Jackson, right? Samuel Jackson is often in the background, and if I remember correctly he's kind of like the mediator between these shadowy figures that sort of exist as... I don't know, they all look like middle-aged white men and they're sort of like a power group and they communicate on screen, I don't know exactly who they are. But Jackson plays an intermediary. But he is lacking an eye. And part of the reason, you infer, that Jackson is lacking an eye is because he's had a pretty long history of being involved in catastrophe. And you know, one consequence of that is that he's become damaged. Well, the same thing happens to Horus. So Horus goes back and he says to Set, I see you for who you are. I know what you're up to. You're working for destruction. You want to take the state apart. There's nothing positive about what you're doing. You facilitate deception. So I'm taking the state back. So they have a big fight. And during the fight, Set tears out one of Horus's eyes. Now that's worth thinking about too, because what it means (and this is exactly right)... you know, one of the things Jung said about encountering malevolence. It's like, let's say that you wanted to understand what the Nazis did. And so you started to take it apart. And at each little bit of exploration you take it apart a little bit more deeply, and then a little bit more deeply, and then a little bit more deeply. You want to get to the bottom of it. Well you might ask yourself, well what's at the bottom of terrible things? Well the answer to that... an answer to that... is the archetype of evil. And if you are to the degree that you encounter that, even if you're capable of god-like attention, which is the case with Horus, the probability is that that will be so devastating that it will destroy half your consciousness. That's what happens to Horus. And so that's another thing I really like about the myths, man. They don't mess around. You're supposed to come out of the Underworld, you're supposed to see what the hell's going on, you're supposed to go back and take the state away from its archaic institutions and wilful blindness. But if you really contend with that, you better look out, because you're contending with something that you can barely master. Anyways, Horus beats Set, despite the fact that he has his eye torn out. And so then he tell Set to go outside the boundaries of the Kingdom and to never come back. Well, why doesn't he kill him? Well he can't, he's a god. You can't get rid of Set. Set is the deity of the decomposition of states. That's not going away. The best you can do is hold it at bay for periods of time. And you have to be awake and aware of its constant presence. Anyways, he chases Set away but he gets his eye back. And so he reclaims his consciousness from malevolence, essentially. And then you might think, okay, well what should he do? He should slap that eye back in his head, and he's defeated evil, so now he should be king. And that would be a good ending to the story, but that isn't what the Egyptians do, and this is where they really get brilliant, in my estimation. So Horus takes his eye, and he goes back to the Underworld. So he does this voluntarily. He goes back to the Underworld. And he goes back to where Osiris is existing, because it's sort of the land of the dead. And so Osiris has this weird existence. He's scattered all over Egypt, but his essence, I suppose, his spirit, is down there in the Underworld, which is... it's not exactly hell. Hell is a suburb of the Underworld. Like it's the worst neighbourhood of the Underworld, that's a good way of thinking about it. You guys go to the Underworld fairly often. You may take a rare side-trip to hell, and you probably regret it. And we can talk about that means, because it actually has a very specific meaning. Anyways, Osiris isn't in hell, he's just in the Underworld. So he's sitting there sort of, you know, inactive. And in rough shape. So Horus goes down to the Underworld, and he finds Osiris, and he gives him an eye! And so then Osiris can see again. Remember, he couldn't see, he was wilfully blind, right? And so that's partly what led to his demise. Horus give him this eye that's been hard fought. It's the eye with which he encountered evil. He gives Osiris that eye, perks him right up. And so then Horus and Osiris go back to the surface world, and they unite to form the ruler of Egypt. And so the idea is that the proper ruler is obviously the thing that can pay attention and conquer the pathology of the state and wilful blindness, but it's more that. It's the thing that does that and then rejuvenates the state. And you know, one of the things, I think this is quite interesting... so the hippie culture in the 1960s was a revolutionary culture, and you can make a case that during the 60s, and the latter part of the 50s, young people's attention was very much focused on certain pathological elements of the state. You know, the Civil Rights Movement seemed to be a real thing, there was a movement towards emancipation of women, there were lots of things that I think you can look at from a distance and say, you know, good work. But then there was the other element of it, which was, well, you know, down with the state and don't trust anyone over 30. Well, that's kind of stupid, because first of all it's not that long till you're 30 and then what do you do? And second, well no, you can't throw the damn baby out with the bathwater. I mean first of all, you're probably doing that because you don't want to grow up, ever. You're just Peter Pan. And second, it's like, you can't leave Osiris languishing in the Underworld. You have to give him vision and bring him back up to the surface. Because I don't care how attentive you are, if you're also not wise you're not going to be good for anything. And the wisdom is partly the integration of the best your culture has to offer you into your character, so that you can be an avatar of culture, an attentive avatar of culture. And then you're a well-balanced soul. Well, so the Egyptians figured all this out. And then it's even cooler than that, because they used this idea of the union of Horus and Osiris as their conceptual representation of what gave the Pharaoh sovereignty. Because again, like the Mesopotamians, they were trying to figure out, well what should rule? What should be above all? And the Mesopotamians figured, well it's something like Marduk, he's got lots of eyes, he can talk, he's brave, he'll conquer the unknown. As a consequence, he makes a pretty good top god. And the Egyptians added a level of sophistication to that, because Horus is not only the thing that will go into the Underworld, he goes into the Underworld and he rescues things of tremendous value and then unites with them, so that not only can he see, but he's wise. And so then that's what the Pharaoh is supposed to be. And the Egyptians basically characterised that union as something akin to the immortal soul. Now, Eliade tracks this development, he called it the 'democratisation of Osiris'. So first of all, basically only the Pharaoh was allowed to be the Horus-Osiris union in some sense. And so in a way he was God on Earth, you know, which is a conception of course that has lasted into cultures for a very, very long period of time. And the Japanese still thought that way about their emperor until the end of World War II. Many of them still think that way. So he was the embodiment of divine sovereignty. It was in the leader only. But as the Egyptian state developed, the idea that that soul was an attribute started to descend down the power hierarchy. So after a while the aristocracy started to use it. And then, and this is a radical oversimplification, but it'll do for the purposes of this discussion, you know by the time the Jews came along, and they came out of Egypt (mythologically speaking), the idea that there could be a union or a relationship between something that was divine and something that was individual was distributed a long ways down the power hierarchy. And then by the time the Greeks showed up, well in some sense it was all males, at least all males who were part of the polity. And when the Christians emerged, it was everyone. Prostitutes, tax collectors, thieves, murderers, everyone. And so the idea of sovereignty started to become, you know first of all it was a mythological attribute, it was identified with the ruler, but then it became a psychological attribute that was distributed across the entire population. It's brilliant. It's brilliant! And as far as I can tell, those conceptualisations formed the sub-structure of our belief that each person is divinely valuable, in their own right. That they have inalienable rights, even if you're a murderer, right, the state is very restricted in what it can do to you. Even if you committed a terrible crime, even if you admit to it, the state is still very restricted in what it's allowed to do to you. Because there's an idea that there's something about you that has the quality of transcendent value. That's exactly it. And well, we know some of the attributes. One of them is you can see and pay attention and another is that you can speak and communicate. You know, the other is that you can become wise, that you can approach things that frighten you with courage, and generate new information as a consequence. Like there's lots of things about you that the relationship between Chaos and Order actually literally depend upon. And so the state has come to respect the individual partly because the individual is, by necessity, the thing that rejuvenates the state. And so there's this dynamic relationship between the two. The state structures you, but it's old and it's blind, and there's lots of things it can't see, and it's partly corrupt. Okay, but it's hell of a lot better than nothing, generally speaking, and so then you're like the forerunner of the state, and you can pay attention. Maybe you can see where things aren't working exactly right, where they're not working properly, and fix them. And so then the state maintains its protective structure across time and you exist in a dialectical relationship with it. You know, you see by the time the Christian hero mythology emerges, Christ is more the reconstructor of the state than he is the thing that encounters chaos, right? Because a huge chunk of the Christian story is about the antagonism between him and his culture and the Roman culture as well. So the whole existential drama actually shifts from hero as buttressing against nature, which of course would have been the case earlier, to hero as thing that decomposes and reconstructs culture in a radical way. So you know, Moses does the same thing, and Moses is a master of water, he's a transformative agent, so it's an indication of exactly the same sort of idea. That's a good time for a break.
So while you guys were gone, I went on Wikipedia and looked up Osiris, because when I did the research for this book it certainly wasn't possible to get access to that kind of information instantaneously. And the stories that are laid out in there... there's a thread that runs the stories that are laid out there, that's quite similar to the one I told you, but there's all sorts of details that are very radically different. And so, I don't really know what to say about that. And you know, part of the reason that people like Joseph Campbell and Carl Jung and... there was an original anthropologist, an armchair anthropologist, who wrote a book called The Golden Bough, whose name escapes me momentarily it's Sir James George Frazer , but it was one of the first attempts to do a cross-cultural categorisation of mythology, and to look for underlying commonalities. Now the problem is, you know I told you about Naomi Klein going down to Argentina and looking at the factory through her particular lens. The problem is that when you develop a lens and then you look at things through it, you may just see what that lens heightens, you know, and I think that's a criticism that could be leveled against the sorts of things that I'm telling you about. You know, that I've cherry-picked certain stories and interpreted them in certain ways so that they fall coherently into a scheme of thought. And so I'll tell you some of the things that I do methodologically to protect myself against that, insofar as that's possible. So there is this idea in psychology called the multimethod-multitrait method of construct validation, which is, you know, a God-awful agglomeration of jargon. But it actually means something. And it was the construction of two psychologists back in the late 1950s, Cronbach and Meehl, who were interested in what psychologists meant when they said something existed. Like say, anger. Is that a real thing? Well what do you mean, 'thing'? What is it that you're talking about? What is anger, exactly? I don't mean as 'anger', but as an idea. What sort of idea is the idea of anger or the idea of anxiety or the idea of sadness? Or the idea of self-esteem or self-competence or any of these things that psychologists talk about as if they're realities. Well, some realities are very tangible, right, and it's somewhat easy to come to agreement about the contours of their existence, and the borders, but other things are way more difficult than that. And so their idea was that if something actually existed, you should be able to measure it multiple ways, using multiple techniques, and still get the same answer. And so, your senses do that. You have five of them. And the reason you have five, apparently, is because evolution has determined that if you only had four you'd die more often. So it seems as if you have five separate sources of information that all lead to the same conclusion. You can be relatively certain that the conclusion's that reached is real. Well, the multimethod-multitrait method is an application of that idea to construct validation, which is like... you could think of anger as an idea, as a construct, it's a terminological issue. You just define it as a construct, a psychological construct. How do you know if they're real? Well the idea is it's very complicated. You have to measure them in multiple ways. All the ways you measure them have to give the same reading. Then you have to show that that idea is the same in certain ways as other ideas that it's related to and different from other ideas that it's not related. So let me give an example. There's a construct: 'neuroticism'. And you might say, well there's another construct: 'depression'. Well then you might say, "well are those separate or are they the same?" Well that's a tough one, because in many, many ways they're the same. Are they different in any important ways? Well, the way you do that technically is you would measure neuroticism however you were going to measure it. Maybe I'd have you tell me how neurotic you were using a questionnaire, and then I'd have your friend tell me and maybe your parent, so we've got a pretty good triangulation on your neuroticism. Then I have them do the same thing, all those people do the same thing with regards to your levels of depression and anxiety. Then I'd use both those measures to predict something else, like how well your life goes in terms of career over the next ten years. And if neuroticism predicted and depression predicted, so they were correlated, then I'd think well there's some relationship. Then I'd look at them at the same time. If I predict with neuroticism and then I add depression to the mix, does that give me more predictive power. So while you guys were gone, I went on Wikipedia and looked up Osiris, because when I did the research for this book it certainly wasn't possible to get access to that kind of information instantaneously. And the stories that are laid out in there... there's a thread that runs the stories that are laid out there, that's quite similar to the one I told you, but there's all sorts of details that are very radically different. And so, I don't really know what to say about that. And you know, part of the reason that people like Joseph Campbell and Carl Jung and... there was an original anthropologist, an armchair anthropologist, who wrote a book called The Golden Bough, whose name escapes me momentarily it's Sir James George Frazer , but it was one of the first attempts to do a cross-cultural categorisation of mythology, and to look for underlying commonalities. Now the problem is, you know I told you about Naomi Klein going down to Argentina and looking at the factory through her particular lens. The problem is that when you develop a lens and then you look at things through it, you may just see what that lens heightens, you know, and I think that's a criticism that could be leveled against the sorts of things that I'm telling you about. You know, that I've cherry-picked certain stories and interpreted them in certain ways so that they fall coherently into a scheme of thought. And so I'll tell you some of the things that I do methodologically to protect myself against that, insofar as that's possible. So there is this idea in psychology called the multimethod-multitrait method of construct validation, which is, you know, a God-awful agglomeration of jargon. But it actually means something. And it was the construction of two psychologists back in the late 1950s, Cronbach and Meehl, who were interested in what psychologists meant when they said something existed. Like say, anger. Is that a real thing? Well what do you mean, 'thing'? What is it that you're talking about? What is anger, exactly? I don't mean as 'anger', but as an idea. What sort of idea is the idea of anger or the idea of anxiety or the idea of sadness? Or the idea of self-esteem or self-competence or any of these things that psychologists talk about as if they're realities. Well, some realities are very tangible, right, and it's somewhat easy to come to agreement about the contours of their existence, and the borders, but other things are way more difficult than that. And so their idea was that if something actually existed, you should be able to measure it multiple ways, using multiple techniques, and still get the same answer. And so, your senses do that. You have five of them. And the reason you have five, apparently, is because evolution has determined that if you only had four you'd die more often. So it seems as if you have five separate sources of information that all lead to the same conclusion. You can be relatively certain that the conclusion's that reached is real. Well, the multimethod-multitrait method is an application of that idea to construct validation, which is like... you could think of anger as an idea, as a construct, it's a terminological issue. You just define it as a construct, a psychological construct. How do you know if they're real? Well the idea is it's very complicated. You have to measure them in multiple ways. All the ways you measure them have to give the same reading. Then you have to show that that idea is the same in certain ways as other ideas that it's related to and different from other ideas that it's not related. So let me give an example. There's a construct: 'neuroticism'. And you might say, well there's another construct: 'depression'. Well then you might say, "well are those separate or are they the same?" Well that's a tough one, because in many, many ways they're the same. Are they different in any important ways? Well, the way you do that technically is you would measure neuroticism however you were going to measure it. Maybe I'd have you tell me how neurotic you were using a questionnaire, and then I'd have your friend tell me and maybe your parent, so we've got a pretty good triangulation on your neuroticism. Then I have them do the same thing, all those people do the same thing with regards to your levels of depression and anxiety. Then I'd use both those measures to predict something else, like how well your life goes in terms of career over the next ten years. And if neuroticism predicted and depression predicted, so they were correlated, then I'd think well there's some relationship. Then I'd look at them at the same time. If I predict with neuroticism and then I add depression to the mix, does that give me more predictive power. It's sort of like does A = C or does A + B = C? That's all you're asking in a regression equation, roughly speaking. Well if A = C is just as good as A + B = C, especially if the two things are also correlated (depression/anxiety and neuroticism are going to be very highly correlated, like 0.7, something like that), you might say well those are the same things. Just because they have different names, it's not helped. And part of it is, it's a pragmatic conceptualisation of reality, it's like, is this categorisation structure good for something? Okay, so anyways, I'll unpack all that and say, well part of my rules for determining whether these things were useful or not was to see if the ideas apply across multiple levels of analysis. So that's why I told you about the conceptual, so that's sort of the cognitive psychology, and then the neuropsychological, so there's some input of brain research. And then the narrative or mythological, and then the cross-cultural and think well those all stack up in a certain way so that if you look between all of them you can see a pattern. And it seems to me increasingly unlikely that that pattern would be there across all of those levels at the same time. Now you could say well, you know that depends on how good you are at weaving a story. But at some point, encapsulating that many phenomena and weaving a coherent story out of them if such a thing doesn't exist, it seems to me to become cognitively impossible. You just can't do it unless there's actually something there. And of course everything I tell you also is a simplification. It has to be. Because you could spend your whole life investigating any of the things we're talking about and so what I'm hoping is I've extracted out the central issues of these multiple levels of analysis and put together, each of them support all the others. Anyways, who knows? You know, I don't know, but so far so good. Okay so this is a cool representation, I really like this one. This is called The Open Virgin. And it's a 14th or 13th century sculpture, if I remember correctly. It's made out of wood. And these things were actually... this isn't the only one of them. They were a form of religious interpretation that had different exemplars. You could find different ones of them online. This is brilliant, this bloody thing, as far as I'm concerned. So let me show you this figure again. So basically what you have here, in this figure, this is a world conception. And the world conception is roughly: there's an individual, positive and negative, he or she is in a cultural sphere that's positive or negative, that's embedded in the world outside of culture, that's positive and negative, and all of it comes from potential. That's the idea. Now, this map shows all of the positives and negatives in relationship to one another, and you see it's not perfectly symmetrical and the reason for that is, as far as I can tell, the adversarial element of the individual is the thing that generates the tyrannical element of culture. And that's the thing that gets in your way of establishing a creative relationship with what you don't know. Well, anyways. Here is a manifestation of that, I believe. And I like this manifestation because... like, it's obviously Christian, but not exactly. It's more mythological than Christian. And the reason for that, well, is quite obvious. So the superordinate figure is Mary, the feminine. Now you think, well it's amazing the person who carved this didn't get burnt up at the Inquisition, because it's a radical idea, but it's just an indication of how the mythology can change the causal relationship between these different elements. So you have Mary there, she's the ultimate in femininity, the ultimate feminine deity, but only the positive side. And then within her, so it's like Nature opens itself up, benevolent Nature opens itself up, and what you see inside is culture, that's God the Father, holding the individual, and the individual in this case is the crucified Christ, which is a wonderful conceptualisation as far as I'm concerned, because of course that is what life does to people, that's why that's such a powerful symbol. It's like, you know, Christ is the person who has to face the reality of his own death, voluntarily or involuntarily, who's betrayed by his culture, betrayed by his friends, it's sort of like he's exposed to the most torturous elements of individual being. And simultaneously, at least in principle, transcends them. Well it's like you bloody well better do that because otherwise, well what's going to happen? You're done if you don't do that. And it's even worse, it's not only that you fail, that's just the beginning of it. If you can't transcend the tragedy of your being then you get corrupted. I see this happening to people happening all the time. So you know, if you're suffering and you can't cope with it, generally speaking what happens is that it embitters you. And once you get bitter you get resentful, and once you get resentful you look for revenge. And that can just get completely out of hand. Now that's a quick trip to the worst suburb of the Underworld, that's for sure. So you know, it's not only that if you don't manage this transcendent act that you're swamped by the tragedy of your life. You're swamped by the tragedy of your life, and then that corrupts you, and then you start working to make everything even more tragic than it has to be. And so I think that's why in medieval Christian conceptualisations in particular, the idea of hell, the idea that you were destined to hell was worse than the idea of dying. And it's a strange idea, you know, because you think (this is what the terror management theorists think too) is that "there's nothing worse than the fear of death!" It's like, that's wrong. They don't have the right imagination. There are lots of things that are worse than the fear of death. I'm not trying to trivialise the fear of death, obviously, but I don't think it's very difficult to understand that there are some things that you would rather die than do. I mean I'm sure that I could get you guys to sit for fifteen minutes and say okay, list ten things that you would rather die than do. That's easy. Especially if you're a parent. You can think of those things in like no time flat. Okay so that's pretty interesting. So you've got the superordinate feminine figure here, which is not what you would expect from a Christian representation, right? You'd expect God to be on the outside, and then Mary and then Christ, in all likelihood, although that would also be a valid representation. Because you can think of the mother as something that's protected by the culture. And supporting the individual, because that's basically what this representation shows. But then you see on the open sides, I really like this, I think it's so cool, is that you've got all these people who aren't archetypal figures, they're in a little crowd. And they're gazing at the central figure. And of course that's exactly what's happened in Christianity for two thousand years, right, insofar as it has spread, is that for two thousand years people have been looking at that image, which is the crucifixion, transfixed by it. Well why? Well, you know, for reasons that we don't understand. When everybody woke up in the late 1800s and said, "why were we looking at that for the last two thousand years?" the first answer was "well we really don't have the foggiest idea". It was just one of the things that we did, roughly speaking. It encapsulated people within the belief system. So that's another good example, anyway, of how this archetypal imagery can manifest itself, say spontaneously, in the imagination of an artist. And the thing is, that's a sacred image. And it is an actuality, that's what it is. What it shows is, well there's a superordinate, transcendent, natural order that has a beneficial element that we associate with femininity, and inside that there's a supportive culture that's properly nested if things are organised properly. And it's both of those things that provide support for the suffering individuals. It's like yeah, that's pretty much got it. Now that doesn't exhaust the meaning of this particular representation, there's a lot more to it than that, but just that is not so bad. And then, you know I can show you a more negative representation, I think I've shown you this before. Like this would be a representation of the negative element of the feminine. And so you have Kali here, and Kali is the goddess to whom you make sacrifices and hopefully if you make the right sacrifices, then Kali turns into her positive counterpart. And you know, you think, well that's a... what... how does sacrifice affect your relationship with the gods? Well first of all there's no gods and second of all, well then what the hell are you doing with the sacrifices? But it's pretty straightforward. We've already talked about this at length. You do make sacrifices, all the time. And what that means is that you act as if you can have a relationship with being. You assume that if you withhold certain things from yourself now, that you will improve your relationship, both with nature and with culture. And I already told you guys that as far as I was concerned that was the most stunning cognitive discovery of mankind. It's the discovery of the future. And it's the discovery of the relationship between the present and the future. You know it's such an amazing idea, that you can alter your behaviour now, and it'll pay off in a year. God, that's not obvious. It's certainly not... animals don't think that way. You know, some of them act that way, like bees and so on, but that's just built right into their behaviour, as far as we can tell. So anyway, so there's Kali. And you know, she's a spider. She's in a web of fire. The fire is outside a web that's made out of skulls. She's got weapons in her hand, her hair is on fire. She's got a headdress of skulls. I mean, if you ever saw something like that it would traumatise you so badly you wouldn't be able to get out of your house for like five years. That's exactly what it is. That's what it is. It's a representation of all of that that would traumatise you if you encountered it. And you know, it's an attempt to encapsulate that as an image, and what you could say, in some sense, is that the people who developed this image were attempting to conceptualise the class of all terrifying things. And once you get the class of all terrifying things conceptualised, you could come up with the class of all useful responses. And that would be something like the proper way to behave, and sacrifice is an integral element of that. It's like yeah, absolutely. Absolutely dead on. Unless you don't believe that sacrifice works, in which case, what the hell are you doing here? I mean, you know, you act out your belief. And it's a firm belief. And you would also say that if things fell apart so badly that sacrifice no longer paid off, your life would basically become intolerable. Because it would mean that you would have abandoned all sense of control over the outcomes of your actions. Well you can't live like that, you'd just die of stress. Well and as I said, she was pregnant, she's given birth to this unfortunate character, who she's devouring intestines first. Like it's a rough image. It's an image of the destructive element of nature. And so that's the negative side of the feminine, we might say. There's a positive representation. This is a Greek representation. That's Diana, or Artemis. I'm hoping I'm remembering this properly. She's multi-breasted. This circle around her head is undoubtedly a representation of her cosmic nature. So it's like a halo but the halo is basically a planetary body like the Sun... a cosmic body like the Sun or the Moon behind the head of the divine individual with all of that power shining forward. So it's an attempt to use... you know, if you look up at the Moon or you look up at the Sun, there's an element that's characterised by awe. You can't help but feel that, at least its beauty and power, and sometimes it's overwhelming. Well, you take the representation of the personality and you throw the representation of these cosmic powers behind it, and it's an attempt to represent transcendent value. It's very intelligent. It's brilliant, in fact. And so partly what you're trying to do as you conduct your life is you're trying to get all of these archetypal forces in proper balance. And I suppose in some sense to get them tilted towards the good, if that's possible. I mean, that's what this representation in some sense, you might say... looks for picture ... yeah, you might say well if you got everything ordered properly, this is what being would be like. Still pretty rough, given that the crucifix is at its centre. Now I don't know, you know, if you think about it from a purely technical perspective, roughly speaking, each of these archetypes is split into positive and negative. You might say, well, that's just how it is. There is no way that you can interact with all of them so that the whole system tilts towards the positive, you know. But I don't think that's true. I think you can get them lined up so that things tilt towards the positive. And I think you can detect when that happens, because those are the periods in your life where you feel that you're richly enough engaged in what you're doing and life is meaningful enough, so that the rest of it, the substructure that makes it necessary, is worth it. It's worthwhile, you know, that the negative exists is okay given the way that things are structured. Now I think that whether or not that's true is in some sense the eternal question of mankind. Can you organise your life so that it's good? Well, it seems like you can certainly allow your life to degenerate so that it's terrible. That seems indisputable, right, and there does seem to be an element of choice in that, although, you know something terrible can happen to you that you have no choice of or control over. But it certainly seems that you could do any number of stupid and blind things that make everything worse. I think that's common experience. And I also think you'd be hard-pressed to find anyone who wouldn't say that there were things they did consciously and willingly, that were of their own choice, that they didn't have to do, that made things worse. So we seem to have some sense of our moral agency. And we seem automatically to accept some responsibility for the outcomes of our actions. And so partly what that means is that we do believe that we can make things better or worse. And I suppose in some way that means that we believe we can tap the whole archetypal structure of being into the positive. Well I would say if you drill down to the bottom of existentialism, in some sense, that's the question that the existentialists pose, you know. Is there a manner of conducting your life such that it becomes... it's not merely acceptable, it's more than that. You'd say yes, this is how it should be. What we're going to do now, although we're not going to do it today, is we're going to start talking about other representations of this sub-structure from other religious traditions. And we're going to also talk about ways that you might relate to these figures. Because one question might be, well you're part of your culture, and it's got an orderly element, and a protective element, and a tyrannical element. Okay so what should you do about that? You know, should you... the tyrannical element is real and it's corrupt and blind, and so to the degree that you identify with that, when you're tyrannical and corrupt and blind, but by the same token you're the fortunate beneficiary of tens of thousands of years of cultural and technological evolution and effort. And it seems to me that, you know, you should be at least appropriately grateful for that. And so then you're in a real position, because you have to be grateful and happy for the thing that tyrannises and controls you. Well, okay, that's not an easy thing to figure out, because those things seem to conflict. So what exactly should your relationship to culture be? Well, I think there are myths that describe that quite directly. And they take into account the corruption. It's not a whitewash. It's like yes of course this thing is dead and blind and corrupt. Obviously. And you know, it's foolishness and wilfulness... it's ignorance and wilful blindness that make it that way, as well as things merely getting old and falling apart. So the fact that there's some malevolence at the bottom of it is also true. Should you flee from that? Well, that isn't what the myths say. They say what you're supposed to do is, just like Pinocchio, you're supposed to go to the bottom of the ocean, to the most monstrous possible part, and rescue your father. That's what you have to do before you become an individual. And I can't see how that can't be right. In fact, I think that's what you're doing in university, if you're actually getting a university education. What you're here to do is sift through the dead remnants of the past and pull up what's vital, that's so sophisticated and complex that there's no way that you'd be able to think it up for yourself. But you know, it requires you as the discriminating agent. You know, if you read someone like Nietzsche or you read someone like Freud, there's lots to throw away. It isn't what you throw away though, it's what you keep that matters. And to be a discriminating reader means that you get rid of the dead matter and you keep the gold. And you build yourself up a storehouse of gold, and then you can live in the world. And people often ask, what's the purpose of getting a degree in the humanities? Well the answer to that is that if you're properly trained in the humanities, you know how to live. Now that's the same as having a job, and you need to have a job. But you know, knowing how to live is a more important thing than having a job, even though having a job is an important thing. And the reason for that is that if you don't know how to live then things fall apart. And that's not good. And they can really fall apart, you know, and part of the reason I think that this became so much of an obsession for me is that I believe that we don't have a lottery of... we are narrowing... we've become so powerful that the consequence of our blindness is reaching uncontrollable proportions. If you're weak and stupid, well you know, there's only so much damage you can do. But we're not weak, not at all. We have unbelievable power at our disposal now, and a lot of weird things are going to come down the pipes in the next ten years. The more people that have their act together, the better. Because then things will be tilted towards everything lining up in a positive direction rather than being tilted in the other direction. And that's important. And I think people can make a very powerful individual contribution to that, wherever you happen to be. You know, all of these myths always say the same thing. They say that the future of the world depends on individual choice. And I think that's literally true. So then you might think, well you better put yourself in a position where you make wise choices, because if you don't... we've already seen what happens. We got a taste in the 20th century. So, if you want some more of that, you could certainly have it.
Alright, so I was thinking today about how to explain this a little bit further. So let's say you're going for a job interview. And you're nervous about it. And you go into the job interview and there are some people there, and some chairs and tables, and a room that's like this, maybe not quite this ugly, but something like this. What's in the room? You're nervous. You've seen chairs and tables before, you've seen people. What's in the room? How about a set of alternate futures? Right? You know, that isn't how we think. It's how we act. And you know, if you talk about it, I was nervous about going to this job interview. Why? Well I thought I might be evaluated. Okay, well why does that matter? Well, we know partly why it matters if we look at this figure again. I'm pretty happy with this figure, all things considered. You know, and you might say, well if I... maybe it'll shape my faith and my belief that I'm a good person. That would be a little silly for an interview. So if you're thinking that way I would say you're not thinking specifically enough. Because there's lots of reasons you might not do well at the job interview, including the fact that they might have already given the job to someone else, for all you know. So you don't want to leap to the top of the hierarchy without cause. So one of the things you might say is that in the room there, there are threats that might be posed to any level of the hierarchy of beliefs and behaviours that you use to interact with the world. Now the terror management people would tell you... let's assume that this points to figure on board is a belief structure. I don't care whether you agree with the way it's represented graphically or not, for the time being, but let's just assume that what we're talking about is a belief structure. Now the terror management people would tell you that you have that belief structure, in large part to protect you from the fear of death, from death anxiety. But there's a bunch of problems with that idea, not least that it actually side-steps the issue of the function of the belief system. It's like, you don't exactly have a belief system to make philosophical sense out of the world. You have a system of tools, that are embodied, that allow you to actually act in the world. Now you might also have an articulated representation of that on top that's more or less accurate. Probably less, all things considered. And you know, maybe if your faith in that is shaken, your faith in what you do will also be shaken, because the two things are associated. But we should always remember that a belief system doesn't just protect you from the fear of death, it protects you from death. And that's a lot different, you know. I mean, this whole thing is your set of skills, and the perceptions and thoughts and emotions that go along with those skills, and then it's an integrated structure consisting of the particular manner in which you've integrated all your own little sub-parts and then in relationship to the whole community. You could also think about it, in some sense, as a holographic representation of the culture. Now, I don't know how much you guys know about holographs. I don't know very much about them either. But there are some things I know about them... so if you shine a light on a holograph, you'll get a 3D image of whatever was there when the holograph was created; it's created by lasers. And if you take a holograph and you break it into pieces, and then you shine a light on the pieces, you get the object in each piece. But it's low resolution. It's a nice way of thinking about a person. Like if your brain is damaged you'll be there, but as a lower resolution representation of yourself. But it's also a really nice way of thinking about what culture is. You know, culture is this massive structure of multiple levels and domains, but it's reflected in each of us. Like, we're each partial carriers of it. So we embody a partial representation of the structure. I mean literally, we embody it. And then we also represent it abstractly. And you know, part of the reason that you go to a university is to, in some sense, improve your capacity to articulate your structure. Right, because you're a cultural creature... it's like, why are you the way you are? Well, some of it is psychological, some of it is sociological, some of it is historical. Like a lot of it is historical. So when you go and you study a social science or a humanity, you're studying your own personality. Now, I wrote a paper a while back with a couple of my graduate students, and I think it was called The Entropy... God, you'd think I would remember this... The Entropy... doesn't matter. The hypothesis was, and this is something I've been think about for a long time, that the world is very, very complex, and so what that means is that the act of getting from one place to another is often very, very difficult. And part of what you're doing when you put together a functional sub-module is you're putting together a little routine that will enable you to transform some part of time and space from what it is into what you want it to be. And in some sense what you're doing is reducing the complexity of that situation. So imagine this, you're going for your job interview. And you're knocking 'em dead. What happens? Well, a whole bunch of possibilities, all that set of possibilities that was concerning you, starts to collapse towards a single solution. And that single solution is, if you're doing very well in the interview, it's a positive solution. So you're anxiety disappears and it's replaced with positive emotion. You get enthusiastic and excited, because what's happening in that room is that the path to a desirable future is opening. Now you can't see any of this, you know, because we're so blinded by the idea that we see objects... we fail to perceive, in any articulated sense, what it is that we're actually dealing with. And I think that one way of thinking about it is that you're always on the edge of something that's potential, and that's where you exist. You exist on this moving boundary of potential. And you can interact with it such that you form it and it passes by you into the past. And hopefully you're forming it in a way that is in concordance with your better health and perhaps with the better health of the people around you, that would be optimal. So you're realising the potential in a genuine, non-metaphorical sense. And that's the thing about these representations, you know. They're often described as mythical, or mythological, or metaphorical. But you know, they're really not metaphorical. Well, that's not exactly right, because the Great Mother, the Great Father, they're partially metaphorical but the thing that they stand for as metaphors is something other than the things that we conceptualise when we look at the world from an objective perspective. Now, we've talked a little bit about the figure of the Dragon of Chaos, and I think that out of all the metaphorical images, it's the most difficult to grasp, because it's that which has not yet been encountered, so it's neither unknown nor known. And you think, well you can't even describe that. Yeah, but you can encounter it, and you can encounter it when you go into a situation that's radically new. Let's say it's just the second before you walk into a high-stakes interview, you know, just before you open the door. I would say that's as close as you get, in a normal day, to a direct encounter with the dragon of chaos, because you don't know what's going to happen. And to say, well, you're in a room and there's a door in front of you, you know it's almost moronic to think of it that way, right? Because what the hell does that have to do with anything? It's... what's in there is unbelievably... like it's the localisation of unbelievably complex webs of causality. That's what's waiting for you inside that room. And then you might say, well is it structured in any real way, and the answer to that is not really. It's no more structured than... it's even less structured than a book you're reading. You know, if you're reading a book you might say, well where's the meaning in this book? And the answer to that is, well it's not in the book. Like it's partly there, because you need the words and the sentences and the paragraphs and all that, but you need the whole cultural context around it in order to interpret it. So you're not reading it blank. You come to it with a set of, a very large set of presuppositions. Enough of them so that you can understand the author. Now maybe you can't, and the book's over your head, or it's badly written, but typically, you come at it with the machinery in place, so that when you interact with the words and the phrases and the sentences and so forth, revelations of new meaning pour forth. And so, I don't know how to say it any clearer than that, that's what the meaning of the book is. And it's in the dialectical interaction between you and the book. Well, if you walk into an interview room, it's even less given, in some sense, than the book, right. Because what's going to happen in there, which really means which of the many futures that that room contains is going to manifest itself, depends very much on how you act. So, it's in that way that you collapse the potential that's in a particular place and you extract something out of it that's... well, and that's when it gets tricky... neutral, positive, or negative? Maybe you bomb the interview, right? And then you might say, well what's happened? What happened? Well that's a very complicated question. Then you're stuck with this hierarchy, right. And that's what you're going to do when you go home. You're going to say "well maybe I didn't dress properly, or maybe I didn't get to the interview on time, or they asked me a bunch of questions I wasn't prepared for, or Jesus, I didn't know anything about what's going on, my whole education was a waste of time, and what the hell am I doing"? And then you might go "I'm never going to get a job". And you know, you could say in some sense that all of those hypotheses, as you move up and down the hierarchy, you move from trivial trouble to really not good trouble, as you bounce, and all of that is an attempt to specify, in some sense, what that room contained. And it's not easy. It's weird too, because the room can contain things that alter your past. Because maybe you say, well maybe you're going for a computer science job, maybe you're not, whatever. You go in there and you think you're the top person in your class, and maybe you were, but you know the people in there are so far ahead of you that you can't even imagine ever catching up. And you know, when you come out of there, the manner in which you construe your educational history is going to be radically transformed. So there's a lot of trouble in that room. There's a lot. Now one of the things we though in this paper... you can think of each of those little eggs, they're really eggs, as a container, and what they contain is entropy, trouble. And the smaller ones contain smaller amounts of entropy and the bigger ones contain bigger amounts of entropy. And so, here's another example. You're driving down the highway and your car sputters and grinds to a halt. Maybe it makes a nice radical noise while it's doing it. So okay, well, what happened? Well the answer is, the simple answer is, your car malfunctioned and you had to pull off the road. That's a really object-oriented analysis. But what's actually happened is that you had a conceptualisation of the car as a pragmatic tool, because what do you know about the damn car? The car was an affordance, that's the right word, that would get you from point A to point B, and you could have a very low-resolution model of it, right? It can just look like a plastic shell, which is sort of what a car looks like. And as long as you see how low-resolution that is, you could replace it with a cartoon and you wouldn't even notice. That's good enough representation as long as the thing is doing what it's supposed to be doing. But as soon as it stops doing what it's supposed to be doing then it could be any old thing. And you think, well what does any old thing mean? Well maybe you're on a deserted highway and it's one o'clock in the morning. And you know, someone pulls over to help you. Okay, well, what's that? Well, you know, believe me, your imagination will rapidly span the world of possibility from "oh good, someone's come to help" to "I'm going to be dragged off in the bush and killed". And that's all contained in that sequence of events. And then even if no one does stop, and you have to worry about exactly what's gone wrong, and you have to worry about how you're going to fix it and you have to worry about the mechanic that might help you, and you have to concern yourself with whether or not you're going to need a new car, and then you have to think about your finances. It's like, the idea that that car is a bounded entity, like it looks, is only true when it works. And as soon as it doesn't work, then God, it's any old thing. And that, in some sense, is the dragon of chaos. Now, what seems to me to have happened... because you might think, well how did people come to conceptualise such a thing, because I would think that, of all the things that are difficult to conceptualise, the category of all things that you have not yet encountered is the most difficult thing to discover, right? It's kind of like zero. It took people a long time to figure out zero, and no wonder. We need a symbol for nothing. Well, this is even worse. We need a representation for potential. Well, you think, why? Well it's because it's actually potential that you're interacting with all the time. Now what seems to me to have happened was that... you know, this is an evolutionary just-so story, so I'm not assuming that it worked precisely this way, but it doesn't matter. Because I'm going to touch on the appropriate features. Well one of the things we know about social animals, generally speaking, and animals in general, is that they have a territory, right? And so you think, well what is their territory exactly? And you might say, well you can mark it out. Here's a... oh, what would have a territory? Like a tiger, they're pretty solitary, so it'll be simple. They have a big territory, right? And it's hundreds of square miles. And the reason for that is, well they're tigers. You can't have like fifty of them, because they'll just eat everything that's there. You know, you have to have a big territory to support one apex predator. So then you might say, well what exactly is the territory of the tiger? And you'd say well here are its boundaries. This is where it roams. But that's not the right way of thinking about the territory of the tiger. Because the territory of the tiger is actually all the places where, when the tiger does its thing, the things that the tiger wants or expects, happen. That's the tiger's territory. It's the same with you. You're at home wherever you know what to do. And what you're doing when you know what to do is you know how to match this hierarchy, which is partly action-oriented, you know how to match the hierarchy with the situation. So that when you put it into practice, the potential that's there transforms itself into what you're aiming at. And that's your territory. And you need to think about it that way because your territory can shift very rapidly on you, and if you think about it geographically, it's kind of confusing. So let's say you're on the subway that you always take. And then someone sits down beside you and they're muttering away madly and they have a pretty malevolent look on their face. And you get a glimpse inside their coat and there's a knife. It's like, you're not in your territory anymore! And the fact that all of the objective entities are still there arrayed around you is just a... it's nothing more than a... it's a delusion at that point to think that those things characterise where you are. Okay so, if you're willing to consider territory as that... it's a space-time continuum, okay? And the reason I'm stressing that... I mean, first of all, whatever reality is, is a space-time continuum, right? It's got three dimensions of space and one dimension of time. And everyone knows that, as we sit here, more or less stable in three dimensions, time flows past us, in some sense. And so the three-dimensional reality is transforming all by itself, just because of time. Okay, and so when we're mapping out our territories, we map out space-time territories. And so, that means that not only do you know where you are, you know when you are. And if you're in your territory you know how to act through that place and that time so that you transform the potential that's there into whatever it is that you're aiming at. Okay, so that's your territory. Now, that territory is isomorphic evolutionarily with lots of things, which you could also confuse geographically. So you might think of a human territory as something like... it's probably, the fundamental human territory is probably a fire. And so the fire is a place of light in the darkness and then you could think of rings, concentric rings of relative safety surrounding the fire. So right beside the fire, where it's warm and light and there's lots of other people, man that's explored territory, you know? But then if you start wandering away from the fire into the bush, especially if you're in a very biologically active area, then the farther away you get from the fire the more you're going outside your territory. And you can tell that's happening because your whole nervous system starts to function differently. What happens is that the nervous system parts that you were using while you were in known territory, they just shut down, and then other nervous system elements that you used in unknown territory start to turn on. And generally you're not very happy about that. Because when you're aware you've mastered the territory, you can presume that neutral or moderately good things are going to happen, with the possibility of something great now and then. But as you move away from that, it flips in some sense to "I don't know what's going on here and I might fall" to "something's going to bite me" to "I'm going to die a painful death", you know, and you don't use the same circuits to process the first situation to process the first situation as you do to process the second. You don't even like having the second one on. So you know what it's like... maybe you've been feeling a bit down, because that always helps, and you wake up at three in the morning and you're worrying about six things and you hear some random noise somewhere there shouldn't be a random noise. Well, how you feel right then, that's what it is like to have the system that deals with the unexpected 'on'. You're like a prey animal. Really, really, exactly like one, because that's what you actually are in many ways. So you know, your whole biology transforms so that you're prepared for God only knows what. Well, what seemed to have happened in the course of evolution was that, when we were smaller creatures, and far after that, before let's say we figured out how to use throwing sticks and slings, and then later maybe bows and arrows, or maybe even sticks, like, we were getting eaten a lot. I think I told you guys last week that they just discovered this damn cat in Africa that looks like it preyed on our fore-bearers. And we have pretty hard skulls so the normal cat can't really gnaw through them, but this cat had a special set of teeth, and if it grabbed the front of your head it would drive one of its teeth right through the back of your skull. So you know, the hominids were preyed on enough so that they had their own predators. Well, so you know, that's just not very pleasant. And then, that's by the time we were hominids. You can go back farther than that to when we were little tree rats, roughly speaking, and then all sorts of things were eating us. There were a lot of reptiles back then, sixty million years ago, and they weren't pleasant. There were still dinosaurs around sixty million years ago. You know, that's a lot of evolutionary time for us to have developed biological systems that distinguish between places we're safe and places we're not safe. Well, you roughly have one set of neuropsychological, neuropsychophysiological functions for familiar territory and another set for unfamiliar territory. Now what I would say... this is where this becomes, I think, radically different to terror management theory, what these hierarchy is doing when it's functioning is shutting off... is keeping a system that operates in unexplored territory shut off. And you like that. And that's when you're calm. Like you are in here, you're relatively at home here, because you assume that you know how to act here, as long as you sit and ask questions more or less appropriately and you don't bother people and you don't talk on your phone, and various other things, the probability that you're going to confronted by an angry primate or some other predator is very, very low. And so, you'd say, well you're normal. You feel like you do normally here. But I would say the only reason you feel that way normally to begin with is because you don't go places where you feel not normal. You stay away from them. And everyone knows what those places are like. I saw a real cool example of this once. I was down by OCAD at about midnight on a Saturday night. You know, it was in the summer so there were all these kids, really, wandering around in their party clothes and going to the clubs. And I was standing there watching and I looked through a park at this street that runs by near OCAD and there were these houses. There was a row of houses and there were three houses here and they were all really nicely taken care of, then there was a house here, and then there were some more houses over here that were well taken care of. And that house in the middle was condemned. So the roof was rotting and they'd boarded up all the windows, and the fence was falling off and there was garbage in the yard, it was a derelict place, you know. So that's kind of a spooky place. Well, while I was standing there this guy walked down the street, and he was very intoxicated, and he wasn't very happy and he was sort of muttering to himself. And he passed the three houses that were in pretty good shape, and then as soon as he got in front of the house that was derelict, he just started to rant, and he was pounding up and down and muttering paranoid things, and you know, sounding really dangerous. But he kept more or less moving forward, and then just after he got back past that borderline and back into the more or less normal neighbourhood, he switched back to just mumbling quietly and kept moving forward. And you know he was just so damn intoxicated, there isn't a possibility that he noticed what had happened, but he was being cued by the surroundings, you know, and it was a different 'him' when he was in unexplored territory, something that had degenerated back into chaos. So the anger and aggression came out of him because that's often necessary if you're going to be where there's chaos. You know, and chaos can burst forth, and does, all the time in people's lives, you know. If you're sitting around the dinner table with your family, and everything's going pretty well but someone touches on one of those topics that you should just shut the hell up about, it can take almost no time at all before the whole thing unravels, and then God only knows where you are. And it's not pleasant. So instead of our belief systems protecting us from death anxiety, our hierarchical pragmatic systems for interacting with the world stop the parts of our brain that deal with the unexpected from being on. And they don't do that because we believe, they do that because when we enact those structures, all hell doesn't break loose. So there's nothing illusory about it. Now, you know, you might say, well, in the final analysis, does it really protect you from chaos? And you know, that's an okay question, but most of the time that's irrelevant. It isn't always irrelevant, but most of the time it just doesn't matter. And the other thing is that much of the time it doesn't even matter if you believe this. By which I would mean, you have an articulated representation of it, it's also a self-representation, and you carry that around, and maybe you have a crisis of faith and you don't believe in that, you still act all this stuff out. And most of the time you're still extremely well-protected by it. So it's more robust than merely the articulated or imagined version. It's a lot deeper than that. It's only a tiny part of its structure. And so, we should never really talk about 'belief systems' exactly, especially not if they're shared with very many other people, because they're not structures of belief, they're much deeper structures than that. And the belief part is only a pale reflection of the underlying reality. Okay, so that... I presume that makes sense, and you can make sense of that in your own life. You know, there's other things that can happen too that I should mention, is lots of times people have chaos... you know, you think your body is explored territory, it's sort of the ultimate explored territory. But I would say, don't get too convinced about that. That can also switch in a moment, and it happens to people all the time. So if you get a tooth pulled, it takes your tongue like three months to map the inside of your mouth again. So that's re-familiarising your brain with the new territory, right? And that's very, very complicated. So your body representation is extremely complicated. And it's really easy to screw up. So if you have someone go like that crosses forearms and hands and fingers and then you point to one of their fingers in the middle and get them to move it (don't touch it), they often can't, because just that's enough to boggle up their visual representation of their body. And so you can play all sorts of tricks on people that way. So you know, your map of your body and your body are sort of reasonably well associated, but they can be dissociated quite rapidly, and you know that happens when, maybe you get a little hypochondriacal and start worrying about your health. Something's bugging you and you don't exactly know what it is. It's like, well, all of a sudden you get alienated from your body. And that can get really serious. And I've seen people after a car accident, this was the most striking of this, this client I had had her shoulder up like this stiffens right shoulder . And I noticed she never really looked in the direction of that arm and when she moved it she'd only move it about this far. And after seeing her for a while I thought "oh, she's afraid of that arm". Now it had been hurt. Well why would you get afraid of your arm? Well, it doesn't act like it used to, so that's annoying. And then when you move it wrong it hurts, and then you also don't know that if you move it wrong and it hurts, whether you're making it worse. So then you just kind of ignore it, and then it's sort of your arm and sort of not your arm. And I had her at one point, we just practiced just doing this loosens shoulder . I'd say, I'd do the action and say "can you do this?" Raises left arm slightly . She'd do it. And then I'd go "well can you do this?" Raises arm slightly higher . And she'd do it. And then I'd say "can you do this?" Raises arm even higher . We just kept doing this, it only took about half an hour until she was up here arm fully raised , and she said "I haven't put my arm up there for two years!" And then I did the same thing with her shoulder. I said, "Can you lift your shoulder?" "No." "Can you lift it one-sixteenth of an inch?" Well, she could do that. Well, you know, sixteen times one-sixteenth of an inch is an inch, and that's starting to get there. And you know, she did this a bunch and then her arm went down. So she'd been holding the damn arm up for two years. Just try that. You know, I mean you do this raises arm for five minutes and see what happens, just hold your shoulder up there for two years and see what that does to the entire right side of your body. Like it's really, really stressful. And then I did something strange, then, which was a whim, but I think it was because I was embodying her because I was paying so close attention. I asked her to come lean over my desk because there was something about the way she was holding herself that was really bugging me. And so I asked her just to lean over my desk and I pounded on her back down her spinal cord and she drooped her shoulders again and then she cried for about half an hour. And again, it was because, she'd got hit by a car, that's just how she was, she just walked around like that, permanently, more or less. And we worked it out of her reasonably well. But even your own damn body can become unexplored territory. And that's another way of understanding that yin-yang symbol, right? You've got the black serpent, paisley, and it's got a little white dot in it. Which means that sometimes when things are really broken all to hell a solution can come blasting forth and chaos turns into order. But more likely, you know, everything's going pretty nicely and up something comes and the chaos spills into the order. And that's the world you live in. And that's not a metaphor. And it's really interesting to know that, because then the question becomes "okay, well, what do you do in order and what do you do in chaos?' Those are useful things to know. We kind of know what to do in order because that sort of defines order. But we don't really know what to do in chaos, you know. In fact the field of mental health is in some sense an attempt to figure that out. But I can tell you some things to do when you're in chaos. So let's say you're dealing with someone who's very, very ill. Or maybe it's you that's very, very ill. And so God only knows what's going to happen in the future. Or even next week. Well, the first thing you do is stop thinking about next week and the future. Because it's not calculable, right? The pathways have become so multiple and so uncontrollable that if you think about them it's just going to hurt you. And so, you know, you can't just not think about it, because that doesn't work. But what you can do is narrow your time-frame of analysis. You know, so instead of worrying about the week, you think okay, well let's make this day as good as it can be. And then if you're really stressed, it's like, no we're going to really work on this hour. And so what happens is you hyper-attend to the local space-time area and that's what you've got. You can work with that. And it really works. Like if you're dealing with people who are dying, for example, that's what you do. You zero in to the right level of resolution, fundamentally. And you can tell when it's the right level of resolution because you don't feel like you don't know what you're doing anymore. "What am I doing here, what am I supposed to do here, what does all this mean?" You don't feel that anymore. Because those are the wrong questions at that point in time. And you know, maybe you try to make the person comfortable, and you pay attention, so you can take the right micro-movements and the right micro-attitudes in those critical moments, and that's what you do. And so that's one way of dealing with the underworld and you need to know that, because it's going to happen. So if you're really stressed, you think about smaller amounts of space and time. And you try to get them right, it's still important to get it right, but the entropy is so high at that point, the landscape is so complicated, that there's no that you can map more than a few moments at a time. But it turns out often that that's okay. That's good enough. You know, obviously it's not optimal, but one thing you can be sure of is you can take a terrible situation and you can make it a hell of a lot worse. So you know, if it's a terrible situation and you manage it as well as it can be managed, then maybe it's only terrible. But if you take a terrible situation and you manage it really badly, then it can be something that you never, ever recover from. So, I'm not trying to be hyper-optimistic about this, I know people go through rough times. But there's a difference between tragedy and hell. And tragedy is when something happens and you're awake. And hell is when something terrible happens and you're not awake. And that's a place you really don't want to go. So then the death of your father could turn into the obliteration of your entire family. Well, you know, the first is bad enough, but the second might well be unbearable. You know, because people often fight in circumstances like that, and the family gets very, very stressed. It's very common, for example, if a couple has a sick child or a child that dies that they get divorced. It's not surprising, you know. It's not like they have a psychological problem, they have a real problem. And they might be amplifying it with their psychological problems, but all problems are not psychological. And that's also useful to know, because if you end up somewhere that you don't expect, you're going to be thinking (especially if you're conscientious): "If I wasn't such a useless fool, I would have never ended up here". And there's a much more pessimistic thought than that that's much more useful, which is: whether you were a fool or not you were going to end up somewhere like this now and then. And you might think, God, that's a horrible thing to think, because that means that our destinies are uncontrollable, at least in part. It's like, yeah they are. So partly what that means is prepare yourself for that, and don't pound yourself into the ground when you get there. Because it happens to people, and it isn't necessarily the case that the reason it happened to you is because you're useless. Now, that might have furthered the process and all that, but you just don't need those thoughts at that time. All they do is undermine you. And when you know "yeah, you know, everybody's dog dies" (which is true), it's like, well, it takes some of the guilt out of it, and the guilt is something that at that point you don't really need. Okay, so, you've got your explored territory, and we've kind of walked through what that is, and then you have your unexplored territory. And then you have the things that sort of exist on the fringe. I would say in some sense the things that exist on the fringe closer to the unknown, those are usually symbolised by the Terrible Mother. And then the order is symbolised by the Terrible Father. And then the chaos that's beyond order... the unknown that's beyond order and chaos, that's the Dragon of Chaos. Now it's a reptile, right, a reptilian carnivore. It's a reptilian carnivore that has a variety of interesting properties. So let me show you some of the pictures that I've got of the dragon of chaos. This is a good one. So that's a figure called an 'Ouroboros', and you can say in some sense that that's one of the first graphical representations of the infinite. You know, we have a symbol for infinity, right, which is another thing that's pretty weird to symbolise, because you're encapsulating something that can't be encapsulated inside a capsule, right. It's very sneaky to be able to do that. And you actually need it to do advanced mathematics of all sorts of kinds. So it's real, at least insofar as you can use it as a tool. So let me tell you a few things about this symbol, this representation. It's kind of like the Judeo-Christian idea of God being the Alpha and Omega. Which is this thing that exists from the beginning of time all the way to the end of time. So it's something that exists outside of time. So you could think about this, at one level, as the eternal presence of The Predator. Predators come and go; The Predator never goes away. So it's got this God-like... you could say the spirit of The Predator never disappears. And as soon as you think that way then you have some idea about what archaic people were doing when they were populating the world with spirits. The difference between a spirit and an abstract idea is like, there's no difference. The spirit of The Predator inhabits the jungle. It's like, yeah, that's for sure. And you should be very careful of disturbing such spirits when you go in there. Well so then you might ask yourself, well, what is a predator? Well, that's a complicated thing, because we would say, because we're scientifically-minded, that you can take predators and you can classify according to their species and their sub-species and their phyla and all that sort of thing, right. We think about classifying them as objects, and then maybe in terms of their evolutionary origins. But that's not very helpful. You know, if something jumps out and wants to eat you, I mean, knowing what it is might help you plot your escape but all those additional complexities, they're just not the relevant issue at that point. The relevant issue is, how do you keep the predators away from your explored territory? Well, now that's a complicated question, because you might say: what do you mean by that? Do you mean right now, while you're walking through the bush? Do you mean right now for you and your family, while all of you are walking through the bush? There's this old joke about these two guys that go out in the forest, and one guy says to the other: "There's grizzly bears here, so you have to be careful." And then the other guy says, "Well, how fast can you run?" And the first guy says "Well, don't you mean how fast does the grizzly bear run?" And the other guy says "No that isn't what I mean I just want to know if I can run faster than you." Laughter . Right, right. So the reason I'm telling you that stupid joke is because what you want as an answer to a question depends on exactly how you put the question. And so, the answer there was "well I don't care if the grizzly bear eats someone as long as it's not me." Okay, fine, so that's one answer to the question. But then you might think, well let's keep the grizzly bears away from me now, my family now, my tribe now, me tomorrow, my family tomorrow, my tribe tomorrow, then across the week, then across the month, then across the years, then maybe forever. Okay so how is it that you have to act so that you keep the predators away? Well, that starts to become an extraordinarily complicated problem. Because the simple solution might be, well when there's a predator around, climb a tree or run into a hole, which is what lots of animals do. But it's a pretty partial solution. They don't get eaten that day, but what about tomorrow, when the predator's a little hungrier. It's kind of a bone-headed solution, all things considered. So then you might say, well, if we thought of the spirit of the predator, which is more like the fact that there is a class of predators and they're never going to go away, then the question that we have to answer is, how do we act so that that class that's eternal doesn't bother us any more than necessary? Well that's really complicated. Really, really complicated. Because it might mean, in some sense, well, how should you act? Because conquering the problem of having your territory invaded, there's not just reptilian and mammalian predators, right, like bird-things with teeth, there's other people. And they're a lot worse than anything else that's going to come at you, so you also have that problem, how do you keep yourself away from the predatory people and the foreign tribes that are going to invade your land and take it. So there's no difference between that question and how do you establish the security of a nation, roughly speaking. Or maybe even how do you establish peace? You know what I mean? It's a question that doesn't have obvious borders. Okay, so one answer might be, stay away from the damn predators. So you build a big wall, or someone else does, and you hide inside the walls. Well, that's not a bad solution, and of course, that's what people started to do when they originally built cities, right? They built these big walls, like Trump is going to build between Canada and the US, and it'll keep the predators out. But of course, what do we know from the story of Genesis, and from the Daoist symbol? No matter how big the wall is, you can't keep out the damn snakes. So you build a wall and all the snakes pop up inside, so it's not a very good solution. And you know, that's pretty obvious, right? I mean, my suspicions are that mass shooters who are native to the United States kill a lot more people in the US every week than illegal Mexican immigrants. Well, so it's like, what problem exactly are you solving? Okay, so the first question you have to solve when you're... see there's just no solution to this problem open doors in the classroom? Laughter . So, why did you laugh at that, do you think? Student: Because it opened again and it was unexpected? Yeah, but why didn't that terrify you? Well, you know, it's related to the hierarchy issue, right? Because the door isn't behaving properly. So what's funny about that? Well, it's funny to watch someone's little routine not work when the consequences are trivial. It's like, oh well he knows how to close the door. Hahaha it's not working. So now he's got the problem of this door and that's a stupid problem, so everyone can laugh about it, you know? So, little anomalies, that you can bind quickly, are common. And I think it's an indication, to tell you the truth, I think it's an indication of people's transcendent ability. Because what happens, comedians do this with you too, you know. So you'll be sitting in the audience, and the comedian will say this thing and then this thing, and they're connected in some way, but it's not obvious. And then you go, click! And it's like everybody celebrates their brilliance together, like "Oh I get it! Hahaha! Aren't I smart?" And it transforms you from the puzzled thing into the solving thing. And everyone really likes that. It's like, "Yes! We solved it. We can go and combat the unknown together." Okay, so you have this chaos thing here points to figure . As I said, that's called an Ouroboros. The reason it's got its tail in its mouth is... it's a... the idea that that's trying to represent is that this thing is complete unto itself. So it's a symbol of totality. It's everything. How? Well, you walk into the room where your interview is. You might say, what's in there? Well a better question is, what's not in there? That's a better question, because your whole damn future's in there. And you don't even know how much that branches. Your future's in there. The future of your children is in there. The future of your grandchildren is in there. There's these waves that go out from that room that in some sense, especially if you stretch them forward in time, have almost no boundary. You know, I mean, I don't know, each of us is descended from one person. I don't remember how many millions of years ago, but it's not that many. Two? Maybe it's even earlier than that. 650,000 years? Something like that. So for all you know, one of you could be the person through whom the entire human race lived, and maybe it's because you made the right decision in that interview. My point is that potential itself has no boundary, no obvious boundary. And you don't know what you're messing with when you're messing with it. It's very, very complicated. So how should you do it? Well, this figure says, well you better watch out, because some of it is predatory, and it crawls along the ground, and it's got teeth, and it's no damn joke. And then you can think it's sort of snake-like, because snakes sneak around through the grass. And then it's sort of crocodile-like, because snakes don't have teeth but crocodiles sure the hell do, and so do other predatory lizards. And you know, as we've talked about before, the probability that our ancestral plains-dwelling African ancestors were regularly lunched upon by crocodiles is pretty damn high. Because how else would they get water? And you've got to be pretty mean before you can take on a Nile crocodile. I mean, I'm sure we did that fairly early in our evolutionary history, but before that a lot of us were snacks for lizards. Which seems... just not good, you know? So this thing also lives in a hole, dragons usually live in holes or underground, like Harry Potter's basilisk. And usually they're immortal. They live in a cave, they're immortal, right? They live forever, and you don't want to bother them, because then they pop out of their hole, like they do in The Hobbit, and they come and burn down your village. It's like, leave the damn dragon alone. Well, yes and no. Why not leave it alone? Well, maybe it would be better to go get the dragon before it gets you. That's certainly possible. And then there's this other weird thing about dragons which is that they hoard treasure. So maybe you can go and confront the dragon and you get the treasure. And the treasure basically takes two forms. So there's the St. George story, where the treasure is often a trapped, young female. And the other version is the dragon sits on gold. So what's the whole idea there? Well, maybe the best way to overcome the predator, the spirit of the predator, is to confront it. Well, that's a hell of an idea. Then you might think, well how deep an idea is that? You confront the predator, you get the gold. Well, this is that you confront infinite possibility and you get the reward. You encounter infinite possibility properly. You derive from it the rewards that it offers. What are the rewards that infinite possibility offers? Who knows? We have no idea. And it's so interesting, because we live at a time in history where that's literally true. Like I would hesitate to predict anything about fifty years from now. I quit worrying about the future about twenty years ago. Because I thought, oh, I get it. No matter what happens, the probability that it's something I predict is zero. So it's like, whatever you're worried about, well, go ahead and worry about it, but something completely different is going to happen. So it's not really all that useful. You should just be ready for whatever comes, because here it comes. You know, like I think we'll have fully-functional autonomous robots within three or four years. And that's a real game-changer. And God only knows what's going to happen after that. Transplantable organs... those things are... you can print those on 3D printers already. Well, augmented intelligence. You all have augmented intelligence already. What good are facts? You just look them up, right? Everyone's an infinite supply of facts. Student: Can you explain, in different words, why the dragon is eating its own tail? Because it has everything it needs. That's another way of thinking about it. So it's self-contained. It doesn't need anything outside of itself, and there isn't anything outside of itself. So it doesn't rely on anything to exist. That's another way of thinking about it. It's just there. And so there's an echo there of the idea that... of an idea of beyond time. Or I don't know so much beyond space, but certainly beyond time. Time has no effect on it. So it's beyond time, in that sense. Yeah? Student: There's another reason it has its tail in its mouth. And that's because it represents the border between the known world, in all its goodness and badness, and the unknown world. And that border can get smaller as it eats more of its tail. Mhm, right, right. Okay, so, now it has wings, why does it have wings? Well, this is another horribly complicated thing. I'll show you a diagram. This is the closest I've been able to get to it. I often don't talk about this diagram, but I guess I am today. Yeah, okay, we might as well go through this completely. Okay so here's you. So if you look right in the middle there, here I'll make it bigger so that you can see it. You kind of think that you're right here. This is where your consciousness normally sits. Like, you know, are you yourself, that's sort of your conscious body envelope and all that, or are you your family? Well you know, the border there is rather pliable. Well then, you can drill down into the cell, and this is sort of the idea of hierarchy. You know, you can look at principles, so those are your general philosophical beliefs and then your programs, and the sequence of behaviours that you instantiate that in and then your behaviours. And then you can go below that even and you can think of yourself as... well because when you're behaving, what's under that? What's the support for that? The platform for that? Well it's your body, right? Well, what's there? Well, once you get past the level of arm, it's sort of like musculature. And then you might say, what's under that, what's next? Well you have your cellular structure, and so that's what cellular biologists study, God that's so complex. And then below that you have your molecular structures, like DNA, and then underneath that there's the atomic structure. And then underneath that there's the sub-atomic structure, and what are you going to say about that? There isn't even time at that level. And then you can do the same thing if you go up. It's like, people say you shouldn't just pay attention to your family, you're in a cultural group, they're important too. And well, what about the biological group that that's nested in, and maybe you should be paying more attention to the ecosystem rather than to yourself. And you know, you shade upward into this thing that you can't really dissociate yourself from either. So that's what you are, make no mistake about it. Your consciousness is such that you only are located, in some sense, at one level of observation, and God only knows why that is. It's almost as if being has to come to a pinpoint in order for things to exist. The way I've been thinking about it, in some sense, is you could take all of this structure and you know, narrow it down to a single point of a pencil that's writing. And the writing is the transformation of potential into actuality, but in order to do that there has to be a point of contact between you and the potential, and that's your body in part, but it's even narrower than that. It's whatever occupies this tiny little laser beam of attention while you're wandering through the world. And it's like burning reality into being. So why that is, I mean, God, who knows? It's beyond strange. Now, you know, one way of thinking about this whole structure is you could think about it as the psychological world, because you're at the centre of it, or you could think about it as the spiritual world if you think about spirit as a matter of consciousness. It's not the material world anyways, or if it is it's the material world insofar as it's you as a living conscious being. So you know, we tend to separate out consciousness and matter, right? I mean, I'm conscious, that's something weird. We don't think this table is so we think of them as separate substances in a sense, spirit and matter. Well that's what the dragon is: it's half matter, that's the thing that's crawling around on the ground, and it's half spirit, and that's the wings. And then you might say, well why the hell is the dragon half spirit and half matter? Well we've got the spirit part, I just showed you it. So now I'm going to show you the matter part. Okay, so we could say, well what's that? Well it's a chair. You think, that's pretty straightforward. It's actually not, and I can tell you why pretty rapidly. Why is it a chair? Student: The legs? How about a beanbag? Is that a chair? That's right because we can sit in it! And that seems to be the fundamental issue: is this a chair? Is this a chair? Points to desk Student: It can be. It can be, yeah, yeah. You'd say it's not a canonical chair, and neither is a beanbag. Because a chair could be a beanbag or a stump. But you know, that's sort of a canonical chair. But part of my point is, you know, the typical answer that people will give when you ask "why is that a chair?" is that they'll lay out the objective structure, that's only a tiny bit of a chair. You know, if it was that high, would it be a chair? It has to have the right structure and the right function in order for it to be a chair. And so what that means is that thing which is an object is already only existing in relationship to you, in some important sense. But I could also say well, it's part of the classroom. What's the classroom part of? Well it's part of Sid Smith. This chair is part of Sid Smith. And what's Sid Smith part of? Well it's part of the university. And what's the university part of? Well God, it's part of all sorts of things, but we could say it's a piece of the city, it's a chunk of the province, it's a bit of the country, and then it's nested inside a much broader civilisation than that. So that's sort of going up from the chair. And you could say, well, that's not really a chair, and I could say, well if that thing was floating at some point halfway between the Sun and Pluto, I don't think considering it a chair would be reasonable. Because, well for obvious reasons. You know, you can decontextualize something so completely that it isn't what it is anymore. It's not that hard. You know, and you kind of do that to yourself when you say, well, who cares, why is this important? Who's going to know in a million years? Poof! You're decontextualized. It's a stupid trick, it's like a party trick for intellects. It's a stupid trick, you know? Because anybody can do it? And what does it mean? It means you're looking at it from the wrong perspective, that's what it means. So it's not like it's an 'ultimate question'. You wouldn't be able to think about it in fifteen seconds if it was an ultimate question. But then you could do the same thing with the chair that you did that you did with yourself when you zoom in to it, right? So it's made of parts, well obviously, and then the parts are made out of sub-parts and so forth, all the way down to the sub-atomic level. And the chair is all those things at the same time. Okay, so then you might say, well what do you encounter when you encounter the unknown? And that's what you encounter, I think. So let's take a look at this. And you can think about it. It's a weird idea. Okay, so you've got your little frame of reference, right? You're going from point A to point B. And when you're going from point A to point B something that you didn't want to happen happens. And we already know that it can be a little thing that happens, and then you know, haha it's funny, or it can be your whole world falls apart, and then it's a catastrophe. But let's say it's something like the interview. So I would say that's sort of a mid-level anomaly, right? You walk in, there's a lot in there, but you can handle it, weirdly enough. And I suppose that's because there are other places that you can go where there are potential futures lying, so it's not like you're out of potential futures just because you walk through that. So you say, well, what's in that room is anomalous, you don't understand it. It's unformed matter. Now you might say, someone might say, does this interview matter to you? You think, that's a pretty weird question, because things are made out of matter. So what do you mean when you say does this matter to you? Well, partly what it means is that before matter was our matter, it was a matter that was more complicated, linguistically speaking. So if you go back far enough, what people meant by matter wasn't this raps on desk . It was more like, I would say, it's more like potential. Or it's more like information. That's another way of thinking about it. So you could certainly say that room is chock-full of information. So let's go with the information idea, just for the sake of argument. We already talked about it as potential, let's talk about it as information, both of those work. You walk in there and you start interacting with people. And then you leave later and you know, you tell your partner "Well I went for this interview." And they say "How did it go?" And you say "Well, it didn't go very well but I learned some things." Because you could say that, right? Well so I would say you went into that room and you extracted some spirit out of the potential. Now that's exactly how Piaget looked at it by the way. Well, I shouldn't say 'exactly' because it's probably not exactly the way he looked at it. But basically what Piaget proclaimed with children was that children will try out a little routine, and then something will happen that doesn't fit in their little routine. And so they'll investigate it using whatever tools they have at hand. Some of it's trial and error, and some of it's... you know, they try out other tool-like embodiments of their body that have worked in the past. So for example, the first thing a nine-month old will do crawling around on the floor if it encounters something that's roughly mouth-sized is put it in their mouth. Why? Well they don't know what it is, but they kind of know how to use their mouth. So they throw it into their mouth, and then they tongue it, and they get some sense of sort of how it tastes, which is very important, and what its shape is and all that, because they're very wired up in their mouth, and so they can investigate like mad. And so what they encounter is a thing and then when they throw it in their mouth they practice doing something with it, you know, getting its shape, so now they know something about it. So that changes them from a spiritual perspective, a psychological perspective. Now they're slightly different than they were, they've incorporated some information, and they've also transformed the thing into a specific thing with specific features. And so what you might say is that out of potential spirit and matter arise. And that's a very interesting way of looking at it. Also it fits well with the phenomenological philosophers. Because they believe that we encountered phenomena and phenomena were those things that shone forth. And so that's like a reversion to the idea of meaning. Because you've got to think about it this way too... it's like when you walk into a library, God, what's in there? Well, it's inexhaustible, a library. Well, how come you just don't get exhausted? Well, it's because you're not actually interacting with the whole library. You've got this focal point like a laser again, and you've made it into a focal point because you're inside that hierarchical structure, right? So you say, well I'm in the library to get this book, I'm getting this book to read this chapter. So chapter, book, library. I'm going to university, I need to become educated and get a job so I'll be a good citizen and a good person. And so that's what you're doing in the library. You're just doing one little fragment of that. And the more you have that whole model developed, right, all the way from good person all the way down to why you're in the library, the more precise your aim is, the more you know what you're doing, the less encumbered by doubt and uncertainty you are, and the higher probability you have of focusing on your task and then writing the path that you want to be into being. And so, well, so it's very useful to think about things this way and it's also very interesting to note that that's how you act. You actually act like the world is made this way. And it's even weirder because, and this is the case I made for you when we were talking about the structure of the brain. It actually looks like this is how your brain construes the world. Because you have systems, you've got a system that works when you know what you're doing and you've got the other system that works when you don't know what you're doing. And so basically the world is divided, just like the Daoists say, into the orderly domain and the chaotic domain. And you need to know how to operate in both, and you need to balance them. And you need to transform one into the other. And that's basically what you're doing when you're interacting with reality. And you know, one of the things that I will claim, and this will become more important as the course progresses, is that when you're doing something meaningful, you're doing that properly. And the sense of meaning that you have, is actually an indication that your psychophysiology is manifesting that you're in the right place at the right time doing the right thing. And it's real. It's not only real, it's like it's the most real thing. It's where potential is transformed into reality. And it's hard to get any more real than that. So that's partly why I'm telling you that these things aren't exactly metaphors, you know. They have to be represented by metaphor in some sense. But the reality that's underlying them... it's not just a story. Even though it is a story, it's not just a story. It's a real representation of reality. So, you know, the other thing I kind of outlined here is that when you hit an anomaly... you know an anomaly is sort of the thing from which everything shines forth, when it's still really anomalous what happens is that it manifests itself to you in sort of like a burst of contradictory meanings. And that can be paralysing. You know, you could be really, really, really excited and really, really, really nervous. Which might happen, for example, if you were going to a job interview and you actually wanted the job. It would be even worse if you went to a job interview and like 30% of you wanted the job because that's the 30% of you that wants to develop, and another 30% would just as soon fail so that you can crawl under your bed at home and stay there with the dust bunnies until you're forty. And another 25% of you is resentful about the fact that you have to get a stupid job at all. And so then you go in there and it's really, really complicated. Because not only is all that potential there but you're fractured and those fractures make the whole situation way more complicated and unstable than it would otherwise have to be. And that happens to people all the time. I mean, people hedge their bets in job interviews all the time. Because they think "eh, I don't really care." It's like no, you care. You just want to have a story to tell yourself if you fail. Well, and then if you have that story, well then probably you're going to fail, because you don't get to do that. You can't go in there at 60% and hope to win. You have to go in there at 100%. Now that's cool too, because what it implies is just what the clinical psychologists have been telling people for sixty years or seventy years. You have to voluntarily face the things that you're afraid of. Now it's a little more complicated than that because otherwise you could just go play in traffic. So it's not a call to stupid adventure. What it does is assume that you've got a direction and the direction is a valid direction. And then what happens is, as you pursue that, obstacles emerge, anomalous, threatening obstacles, and then you either confront them, or you abandon the whole project. Well generally speaking if you chop them into little pieces then you can confront them and digest them. And then you get stronger because you're doing all this digesting. It's like you're eating the monster of chaos. And that's a classic metaphor for developing wisdom to ingest. Piaget even uses that, right? Assimilate. It's exactly the same idea as ingesting. What you're eating is information instead of matter. And the information restructures you and makes you more informed. And that puts you more in formation. So you know you encounter the anomaly and it's a burst of contradictory potential, and so that's exactly how you respond to it. Your body's going everywhere at once, because God only knows what's going to happen. And then as you interact with it, it collapses. You're collapsing it. That's what happens when you take control of the situation. And then you reduce it to a single path where everything is going properly. And you might say well you're bending it to your own selfish will, but that's not right. Because if you're in... let's say you're in an interview and there's five or six people in there, you can't just bend the damn thing to your will, because you have to interact with those people. And so if you don't do that with... you know, you could be a psychopath and manipulate, but that'll only work for a short period of time, you'll get caught, and then you'll have to move, because that's what psychopaths do, that's how they keep being psychopaths. They exhaust everyone's trust and then they have to move. And then they go find some other people who are trustworthy because they build up trust capital with other people and then they betray them. But they have to keep moving. So it's an unstable solution. So you go in there and you do it properly. Well what are you doing exactly? You know? I would say that if you're really, really nailing that interview, you're saying, well here's a future that we could all march together into confidently and happily. That's what you're saying. And I'm the person to do that. Now you might be saying that on a relatively low scale. Like, if I'm your assistant you're never going to have to worry about me. Because I'm always going to be there. And then maybe if you're the CEO, you're going to say well, you know, this is the way that all of us are going, and here's why, and this is what it's going to look like. And the better you are at that, the more that potential will turn into... it multiplies, that's what happens. If you're good at dealing with it the potential that's accessible to you multiplies. Which is really cool. And also how you'd hope it would be. Because you know, you'd hope that more potential would manifest itself to people who are more competent. Well, if things work well that would be good. So that's the spirit and matter idea. And so that's represented in that dragon. So let's go back to it. Now, okay, so you remember this character here. So what to do about that? What to do about chaos? Well one thing you might want to start by doing is admitting that it exists. So let's say that you're not a terror management advocate. Let's say you're an advocate of positive illusions. Does everyone know what those are? Are you still taught about those in social psychology, positive illusions? Yes? No. How many people know about them? Okay, where did you learn about them? Student: In your class, PSY230. In 230? No one else has taught you about this? Anybody else learn it anywhere else? Student: I learned it online. You learned it online. Okay, well thank God for that. Well, what happened was, the paper where positive illusions were first touted, and that was in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, it was the most cited... was it the most cited paper ever in social psychology? It's up there. And it's an appalling paper! Because it basically says... it says something like this, if you scrape away all the nonsense: things are so horrible that if you just looked at them, you'll be so depressed you'll want to die. So you better not. You better weave around yourself an illusion that things are better than they are and that you're more powerful and wonderful than you actually are. And if you do that, but not too much, then you're going to be happier. Well, you know, the errors in that are just manifold. First it's like, well, who cares if you're happy, what the hell does that have to do with anything? You'd be happy stepping on ants. Laughter . Well really! It's like what the hell stupid idea is that? You've got positive emotion. Cocaine will do that. You know, bullies are pretty happy when they're pounding out someone like Milhouse. So you know, happiness, what the hell's that? It's shallow. It's a dopey idea. And then, well, how big should these lies that you're telling yourself be? And the answer to that is just exactly the size that will make you happy. Well that's not helpful, because if you're going to have a theory, let's hear about exactly how big they should be. Well sometimes they should be this big and other times they should be this big, but there's no real way of telling a priori. Well so that's not really very helpful either. And then there's another idea underneath that that's even worse, which is reality is so awful that you can't look at it. Well that's nasty man, because that means (and that's what the positive illusion stuff meant, sort of like the terror management theorists) if you got an unvarnished look at reality, it would just destroy you. Because you're not strong enough to look at reality in an unvarnished manner. Well, you can imagine why people would believe that. You could think God yes, it's pretty damn awful. But then you think, well wait a minute. Is it really the case that everyone who's out there coping with the world is blind and deluded? Or maybe is it that the people who are not coping with the world very well are blind and deluded? I mean, ask yourself that. You've seen people in your life that you admire, I presume, and certainly you've seen people you don't admire. Well, so let's take the ones you don't admire. Well, how about blind and deluded, does that partially describe them? It would be blind, deluded, bitter, resentful, and mean. That sort of covers the territory. And then the people you admire? Well, they're strong people, generally. They can do things that are really, ridiculously difficult, like have a baby, and raise it without destroying it. Or work in a palliative care ward or be a nurse in a cancer ward for children. I mean, there's a lot of awful things. I talked to this guy the other day. I just met him sort of randomly. And he had had a motorcycle accident. And it was a bad one. He rolled like 200 feet at 60 miles an hour and he broke seven ribs and you know, had a brain hemorrhage. Like it really took it out of him. He was a good athlete before that. And so it probably aged him twenty years. And he's still recovering. And he was telling me, he works for a power company, and so he's climbing up these power poles, you know, because that's part of his job. Well now he's pretty screwed up. He's in his mid-fifties, he's still climbing up power poles. And he was working with a guy who had Parkinson's disease. And so the guy with the Parkinson's disease is at the top of the power pole and he's doing his job. And he's getting shaky, so they're afraid things are going to fall, and then this guy comes up behind him to help him. He's only really got one arm that works. It's like, Jesus, that's tough. Those people are tough, man. You know, because Parkinson's? That sucks. And well, so does having half your arm more or less destroyed by a motorcycle accident and not staying at home hiding under the bed. You know, they're out there still making sure the lights are on. Well, that's a pretty unvarnished confrontation with reality as far as I'm concerned. You know, so I could say... alright, so here's another story. So, I've probably told you a little bit about this before. When the behaviourists first proposed that you could use exposure to treat anxiety, the psychoanalysts were all skeptical about that, because they thought, well you're just treating the symptom. They usually thought of a phobia as the manifestation, the visible manifestation of something that lurked more deeply underground. And there's real truth in that. Like, whatever a mouse is to someone that's mouse-phobic isn't what a mouse is to you. The mouse is a bunch of other things, because otherwise they wouldn't be afraid of it. And so all those... you could say the mouse is an exemplar of the category of all things that they're afraid of. And that's a good way of thinking what that might mean symbolically. And so I had one client who was afraid of mice, and she thought one would run up her leg. And she was also afraid of being raped. And those two things were... there was a metaphorical union between them, even though they're obviously not exactly the same. So the psychoanalysts, they're making their point, you know. But it turned out that... so the original behavioural theory was you can't be anxious and calm at the same time. So what you do first, if you're going to teach someone to not be afraid of a mouse, is teach them how not to be afraid. So you put them in a chair and you do a relaxation exercise with them, and then you show them a picture of a mouse. And you say, just breathe, you know, calm down. And so they calm down. And then sooner or later they can look at the pictures of mice by themselves, and then maybe you could throw a stuffed mouse at them, and then maybe they could walk by a pet store and look at a mouse, and so on and so forth, till you get them holding rats. And so, you know, that works. But it works even if you don't relax. In fact it works just as well. So the old behavioural idea that it was counter-conditioning was wrong, just like the idea that the reason that you were afraid of a rat was because of conditioning. It's like, of course you're afraid of a rat, it's a rat. Just like you're afraid of snakes, you know, to a lesser or greater degree. And people actually become more afraid of snakes as they get older, interestingly enough. Which is not what you really expect, right, unless it was a biological function. So anyways, all you have to do is show people the thing they're afraid of. And what do they learn? They don't learn that the thing isn't frightening. They learn that they're tough. And so one of the things... and that's why it generalises, which is... see the psychoanalysts predicted that what would happen is, well, you know, yeah, yeah, you're not afraid of a mouse anymore, but you're twice as afraid of being raped in your cabin when you're up there alone. It's like no, that isn't what happens. You're not afraid of the mouse anymore and you're half as afraid of being alone up in your cabin. It generalises. And so if you take someone who's agoraphobic and they're in their mid-forties, and somewhat dependent, and you treat them for agoraphobia, then they'll go home and give their husband hell (because they're usually women), and tell them all the things that they've been wanting to tell them for twenty years but have been too afraid to because they thought he might leave. And then they were afraid that he'd leave and they'd fall apart and all of that. So they get... you teach them that they don't have to run out of a subway and all of a sudden they get more confrontational. And the reason for that is because they get more courageous. And the reason for that is they go do something difficult and they watch themselves and hey, they could do it. And so one of the things you might ask about yourself is, how do you know what you have to run away from? You know, you might be so damn tough you just can't bloody well imagine it, and you're just sort of sheltered. Now, look, you're a lot less sheltered than you were when you were three, I presume. How many of you live on your own? Okay, now, that was a transition, I presume. How many of you were depressed and anxious their first year of university? Okay, how many of you weren't? Okay, so it's about 50%. Well that's about right. About a third of first-year UofT meet clinical criteria for depression according to the Beck Depression Inventory. Well why? Well it's hard. You know, you leave your family, you're kind of protected there, you go out, you have to figure out all the things you have to do to keep yourself alive and then you have to go to university and they're going to give you an impossible amount of work that no one could ever possibly master. So it's daunting. And then you're surrounded by people who are smarter than the people you're used to being surrounded by. So that means that you're not as smart as you thought you were. And then you meet people now and then who are way smarter than you and way harder-working and way better-looking and all of those things. So you know, it's depressing. But by the same token, how many of you feel less armed to take on the world than you did five years ago? You're not going to admit it, probably, but I presume that that's a very small number. How many of you feel more prepared? Okay, okay, so that's pretty cool. So what that means is that you went out there and did a whole bunch of difficult things. And some of those things... you've been reading each other's autobiographies right? How's that going? Has it been interesting? Yeah, has it been worthwhile? Anybody think it isn't worthwhile? I really want to know, you know, because it's kind of an experiment, in some sense, to see how this is working. What's good about it? Student: That you can get to know a stranger on the deepest level possible. So why do you like that? Student: Because it makes the class feel more... Yeah you know I'm thinking about working with a company in Edmonton that is setting that up as a way of increasing trust among people who work together in the same company. They're not really sharing their deepest secrets, but what they will be doing is having structured conversations where they find out a little bit about each other. You know, and it's sort of... it seems like to have a relationship with someone you have to get to know their hierarchical structure, right? And it's just like... like the tiniest things while that person sits at the desk and types, well, it's a shallow relationship. And if it's a deep relationship you know much more about the whole structure, right? Which is I think why the metaphor of depth works so well. Okay, so you feel like it catalysed the classroom a little bit more, is that right? Student: Yeah, and isn't it like you fall in love with someone... this isn't about falling in love, but you fall in love with someone when they're vulnerable? Yeah so that's interesting too eh about the whole vulnerability issue. Yeah it's like, if you're forming a relationship with someone what you do is you basically mutually open up your shells you know. Or basically you kind of go like this opens and closes hands . And if it has to close permanently well then you go. Yeah well that's another interesting thing too because what it implies is that unless, you know, you voluntarily expose your vulnerabilities you'll never find a partner, or they won't be a real partner because they don't know who the hell you are. And then you're weak because there's only one of you. Yeah? Student: And the beauty in that is that it's completely anonymous too. Yeah and so why do you like that? Student: Because I can share my deepest secrets but not feel like anyone will... You know there's some evidence that people like computer-guided psychotherapy. For exactly that reason. You can be completely honest with the computer because it doesn't care. Not yet. It will soon but, but it probably won't judge you any more harshly than you set it to. It's like, love and affection today. Laughter . Yeah, well that won't be very far away. Okay so what do other people have to say about the autobiography? Yeah? Student: I found it really interesting because I never personally know so deeply what another person thinks, because we don't share that much... we talk about the beginning of childhood up to this point, we never really have that conversation with anyone else. So you like that too. Student: Yeah I like it a lot. Why? What was good about it for you? Student: Usually as we move through stages in our life we only interact with our age, we never see them holistically. But watching them grow, it's kind of like, very strange, because we don't see people that way. Right, well you're seeing more of this eh? Points to Ouroboros image . Because the person actually extends across time, and you're right, all you see is a slice. Well they're not a slice, they're a whole damn thing, this thing that grows across time. Okay, who else has something to say that's interesting? Laughter . Haha, half the people don't want to talk now. So, anybody else? Student: After doing that and writing so many things about myself, I was actually talking about the assignment with a couple of my friends, and I really thought, I'd actually be okay if the people who read my assignment identified who I was and like, even engaged in conversation with me. And it really inspired me to be more honest about sharing myself in my existing relationships. So why did you conclude that it would be okay if someone identified you? Student: Because I felt a desire to be seen more. And it was kind of... I felt more with myself when I was disclosing more information about myself. And so it made me want to be more with myself in my existing relationships. Okay, that was a very good observation. I'm going to say a couple of things about that and you tell me if you think they're accurate. Okay so the first thing is, it's an act of courage to, haha, expose yourself to someone... no we're not going to say that precisely. It's an act of courage to be truthful with someone. Because they're actually interacting with the actual you. So there's no facade. So that's one thing. So you get more courageous. But then the next thing might be... I would say that you have a more sympathetic relationship with yourself. Because let's say you have this stupid memory about something dumb that you did when you were 13. And you're still carrying that along. It's like, Jesus, you were 13, what the hell do you expect? 13-year-olds are just dumb as sticks, they're going to do all sorts of stupid things. Their brains are all addled from hormones and they're trapped in those little educational prisons. So they're going to do stupid things. But if you're carrying that it's like it's you that did that. It's not some stupid 13-year-old that you once were. And so then you can start to see yourself in perspective, you know, as a 13-year-old like other 13-year-olds. No better, but perhaps no worse. So you can get on your side, in some sense, by walking through your story and seeing what the causal elements are. Does that seem reasonable? Okay, okay, yeah, well so that's a good thing. Student: I think... I really liked it, again, because you really get to know other people and I really liked that. I think that it was also interesting that other people not necessarily knew more about you than you did, but they contemplated the information that you gave them... like I know that someone looked at something that I'd written in a completely different light than I did, and I thought that was so interesting. Just like, the idea of kind of looking at it a little bit more from the outside, and getting a different perspective on it. Right, well that's... what's the famous poem on the best gift we can possibly be given is to see ourselves as others see us? I think it's Robbie Burns and I just mangled the hell out of it. But yeah, you do get that opportunity, and it's weird. And this is something the positive illusion people never think about either. It's that sometimes people think they're better than they are, like objectively, whatever that means. But lots of times the opposite is true, and I think it's often it's true even more often. It's like, people think they're a lot worse than they are. No one's as anxious as me or as concerned about X or is as confused about this or as socially awkward, or is not funny, or you know, everybody's got their paranoia about this part of them that's the worst that anyone could possibly be in the entire world and it's almost never true. Other people are a lot more like that than you think. And they're running around trying to hide it madly as well. So that's a good thing. Well you know, you're also allowing yourself... in some sense you're allowing yourself up into the light. You go through your life and you think, well I can allow other people...



One of the fundamental theses of this course is that in, in modern literature, and in literature that isn't so modern, there's the notion of a human-created monster, Frankenstein, right, springs to mind, and at an adequate time, I mean, Frankenstein was a, a fantasy, an unconscious fantasy, a dream in, in actuality, about the potential dangers of unbridled technological advancement, right, Why is that? Well maybe it's something like this, and, and this is certainly a, a notion that Jung would agree with, if we don't develop a moral sense as conscious and as elaborated as our technological sense, the fact that we're increasingly capable of becoming increasingly powerful will necessarily do us in, right. The bigger your weapons, the smarter you better be to control them, and so maybe it is something like this, maybe, and this is a strict Jungian notion, maybe five hundred years ago when we started to ratchet up the rate at which we were developing our technological expertise, and left our mythological and religious presuppositions and conceptions behind as archaic and perhaps as predicated on superstition , maybe we need to spend as much time updating them and bringing them into the domain of clear consciousness and control as we have spent on developing our technological sense. If you were a medieval Christian or an archaic religious thinker of any sort, your first presupposition was that the world and the cosmos existed exactly as they appeared, which with you or at least your village or town or country at the center, and certainly with the earth at the center, and with the cosmos as a shield around the earth, and with the earth itself as the domain of man being a fundamental attribute of the cosmos. So this is a quotation from Jung, and it's one I like a lot because I think it adequately and succinctly describes the distinction between the way that modern people think, and the way that people think if they're still ensconced within a traditional belief form, How totally, different, did the world appear to medieval man. For him the earth was eternally fixed and it rest in the center of the universe encircled by the course of a sun that solicitously bestowed its warmth, Despite the fact that pre-empirical people had to deal with death and disease on a scale that I think is completely unknown to us, it doesn't seem unreasonable to presuppose that there was a certain degree of comfort to be found in a worldview of this sort, right, because it appeared at least to the casual observer that the cosmos was human centric, and that the notion that human purpose was in some way associated with cosmic significance, seemed to be beyond question, at least in part because there were no theories of reality that would compete with that initial preconception. Men were all children of God unto the loving care of the most High, who prepared them for eternal blessedness, and all knew exactly what they should do and how they should conduct themselves in order to rise from a corruptible world to an incorruptible and joyous existence. Such a life no longer seems real to us, even in our dreams. Natural science has long ago torn this lovely veil to shreds. how is it that people could think that way given that it was so wrong and still survive? Given that in large part we are necessarily creatures of tradition. How is it that we can sever the ties with the manner in which our ancestors thought, and suffer no ill consequences in result? People think automatically, and, and I think for good reasons, that the march of human thought has been unbroken progress towards increased rationality, increased power, increased clarity, but it's certainly the case that as a consequence of sacrifice of our religious beliefs and our philosophical beliefs that problems of meaning have become more paramount for the modern person. And then you might ask, well what exactly are the consequences of that, and I think initially the best perspective to take is one that's historical. As we've moved away from a classical, mystical or mythological worldview, a number of dramatic occurrences have unfolded, we've become much more technologically powerful, right. The application of a strict empirical model designed to abstract out from everyone's experience, those things that are material and constant have enabled us to produce technological implements of extreme power, right, both for good, at least in principle with regards to medical advances, and also for ill, in terms of our ability to control weapons of unbelievable destructive force. So we're more powerful. Are we any smarter or any wiser? Well I think a casual glance at the history of the 20th Century would suggest that perhaps we're not. I don't think there's any indication whatsoever, although perhaps things have improved in the last fifteen years, that an additional consequence of our capacity to extract ourselves from our religious modes of thought has been a palpable increase in wisdom or tolerance or compassion, or a palpable increase in our ability to understand explicitly what might constitute the basis for a suitable and stable state. So you might take, for example, the fact that the 20th Century has been unbelievably bloody, right, literally hundreds of millions of people killed in conflicts of one form or another, both external, say, in the course of World War II or Vietnam, and internal, in the case of Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union, or any of the vast array of countries who subjected their citizens to terrible internal repression in the name of the maintenance of order. I mentioned that Alexander Solzhenitzyn estimated that sixty million people died in the Soviet Union between 1919 and 1959 as a consequence of internal repression, and his estimates were that perhaps twice that many died during the Cultural Revolution in China. Looking back on the 20th Century, one seem, one thing seems relatively clear, right. Although humanity as a whole has ceased, or had ceased at least to engage in large scale religious conflicts, although they seem to have been making a vicious comeback in the last five years, our ability to live together still seems incredibly compromised by our capacity to engage in ideological conflict, right, and it doesn't seem to me ridiculous to presume that the battles between capitalism and communism, say, or between capitalism, communism and fascism , or even the emergent struggle between fundamentalist Islam and the West, can necessarily be regarded as anything but extensions of our tendency towards religious and mythological conflict, even though, in principle, systems like communism and fascism were not predicated on explicitly religious presuppositions. Well it seems to me that a logical conclusion from observations of that sort is that even if you eradicate the traditional trappings of the mythological worldview, which seems to be what's happened as a consequence of our rise in empirical knowledge, that you don't eradicate the tendency for people to formulate groups, belief systems , around conceptions of ways that you should behave that are, at the very least, religious in structure and action, even if they're not religious in name; I mean I think it's a very peculiar coincidence, for example, that the Soviet Communists erected at Male Trinity Marx, Lenin and Stalin as an apparent replacement for the masculine trinity that comprised the essential deities of Orthodox, Russian Orthodox Christianity. Why would these forms re-emerge so spontaneously, and what does it mean that people who regard themselves as essentially modern and empirical in their presuppositions seem to be absolutely susceptible in their fundament to ideological claims? Well if you look at the Soviet Union, which I think is a very instructive case because the Soviets, the Russians, were really the last European power to fall prey to the conflict between empiricism and science and religion, and they didn't really fall prey to that until the mid 1800's because Russia was a relatively closed society, relatively illiterate, maintaining a medieval structure far past the time when other European countries had abandoned that. In the 1850's, a wave of atheism spread across Russia, in some sense as a wave of enlightenment, but also as a plague, and figures as powering as Tolstoy remembered in his memoirs the very day that he realized that the empirical discoveries of Western Europeans had eradicated his ability to believe in the Russian Orthodox system. You lose something like that, what happens? Well if you believe that mythological thinking is nothing but superstitious empiricism and that it's been replaced entirely by a more appropriate modern view, then nothing happens, right, it's all to your benefit to become enlightened, but if you believe that there's more to the story than that, and that more traditional, ethical and moral systems predicated on mythological presuppositions offer you a map of how to behave and what to think and how to regulate your emotions and what to strive for, none of which can be replaced by a scientific perspective, then the eradication of a system like that leaves a vacuum, and then the question is, what rushes in to fill a vacuum? Well if you look at the case of the Soviet Union, it seems quite instructive, doesn't it. I mean, there's a thirty-year period where there's tremendous intellectual clash, say between a materialist, an empirical perspective, and in Russian Orthodox perspective. The Russian Orthodox perspective loses its attractiveness for the reigning intellectual elite and the presuppositions of communism which appear rational by contrast, but which, by all evidence, were not, rush in to fill the gap, and I want to read you something that Nietzsche wrote, it's perhaps the most famous thing he ever said, although it's almost entirely taken out of context and misquoted, and if not misquoted, at least misunderstood, because Nietzsche was one of these strange people who was capable of living 50 or even 100 years into the future, and although he was, is, generally regarded as an enemy of Christianity and superstition, and was certainly an unbelievably outspoken of Christian... opponent of Christian traditionalism, How similar. Don't know exactly how similar but that's what stories tell you how similar. One of the fundamental theses of this course is that in, in modern literature, and in literature that isn't so modern, there's the notion of a human-created monster, Frankenstein, right, springs to mind, and at an adequate time, I mean, Frankenstein was a, a fantasy, an unconscious fantasy, a dream in, in actuality, about the potential dangers of unbridled technological advancement, right, Why is that? Well maybe it's something like this, and, and this is certainly a, a notion that Jung would agree with, if we don't develop a moral sense as conscious and as elaborated as our technological sense, the fact that we're increasingly capable of becoming increasingly powerful will necessarily do us in, right. The bigger your weapons, the smarter you better be to control them, and so maybe it is something like this, maybe, and this is a strict Jungian notion, maybe five hundred years ago when we started to ratchet up the rate at which we were developing our technological expertise, and left our mythological and religious presuppositions and conceptions behind as archaic and perhaps as predicated on superstition , maybe we need to spend as much time updating them and bringing them into the domain of clear consciousness and control as we have spent on developing our technological sense. If you were a medieval Christian or an archaic religious thinker of any sort, your first presupposition was that the world and the cosmos existed exactly as they appeared, which with you or at least your village or town or country at the center, and certainly with the earth at the center, and with the cosmos as a shield around the earth, and with the earth itself as the domain of man being a fundamental attribute of the cosmos. So this is a quotation from Jung, and it's one I like a lot because I think it adequately and succinctly describes the distinction between the way that modern people think, and the way that people think if they're still ensconced within a traditional belief form, How totally, different, did the world appear to medieval man. For him the earth was eternally fixed and it rest in the center of the universe encircled by the course of a sun that solicitously bestowed its warmth, Despite the fact that pre-empirical people had to deal with death and disease on a scale that I think is completely unknown to us, it doesn't seem unreasonable to presuppose that there was a certain degree of comfort to be found in a worldview of this sort, right, because it appeared at least to the casual observer that the cosmos was human centric, and that the notion that human purpose was in some way associated with cosmic significance, seemed to be beyond question, at least in part because there were no theories of reality that would compete with that initial preconception. Men were all children of God unto the loving care of the most High, who prepared them for eternal blessedness, and all knew exactly what they should do and how they should conduct themselves in order to rise from a corruptible world to an incorruptible and joyous existence. Such a life no longer seems real to us, even in our dreams. Natural science has long ago torn this lovely veil to shreds. how is it that people could think that way given that it was so wrong and still survive? Given that in large part we are necessarily creatures of tradition. How is it that we can sever the ties with the manner in which our ancestors thought, and suffer no ill consequences in result? People think automatically, and, and I think for good reasons, that the march of human thought has been unbroken progress towards increased rationality, increased power, increased clarity, but it's certainly the case that as a consequence of sacrifice of our religious beliefs and our philosophical beliefs that problems of meaning have become more paramount for the modern person. And then you might ask, well what exactly are the consequences of that, and I think initially the best perspective to take is one that's historical. As we've moved away from a classical, mystical or mythological worldview, a number of dramatic occurrences have unfolded, we've become much more technologically powerful, right. The application of a strict empirical model designed to abstract out from everyone's experience, those things that are material and constant have enabled us to produce technological implements of extreme power, right, both for good, at least in principle with regards to medical advances, and also for ill, in terms of our ability to control weapons of unbelievable destructive force. So we're more powerful. Are we any smarter or any wiser? Well I think a casual glance at the history of the 20th Century would suggest that perhaps we're not. I don't think there's any indication whatsoever, although perhaps things have improved in the last fifteen years, that an additional consequence of our capacity to extract ourselves from our religious modes of thought has been a palpable increase in wisdom or tolerance or compassion, or a palpable increase in our ability to understand explicitly what might constitute the basis for a suitable and stable state. So you might take, for example, the fact that the 20th Century has been unbelievably bloody, right, literally hundreds of millions of people killed in conflicts of one form or another, both external, say, in the course of World War II or Vietnam, and internal, in the case of Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union, or any of the vast array of countries who subjected their citizens to terrible internal repression in the name of the maintenance of order. I mentioned that Alexander Solzhenitzyn estimated that sixty million people died in the Soviet Union between 1919 and 1959 as a consequence of internal repression, and his estimates were that perhaps twice that many died during the Cultural Revolution in China. Looking back on the 20th Century, one seem, one thing seems relatively clear, right. Although humanity as a whole has ceased, or had ceased at least to engage in large scale religious conflicts, although they seem to have been making a vicious comeback in the last five years, our ability to live together still seems incredibly compromised by our capacity to engage in ideological conflict, right, and it doesn't seem to me ridiculous to presume that the battles between capitalism and communism, say, or between capitalism, communism and fascism , or even the emergent struggle between fundamentalist Islam and the West, can necessarily be regarded as anything but extensions of our tendency towards religious and mythological conflict, even though, in principle, systems like communism and fascism were not predicated on explicitly religious presuppositions. Well it seems to me that a logical conclusion from observations of that sort is that even if you eradicate the traditional trappings of the mythological worldview, which seems to be what's happened as a consequence of our rise in empirical knowledge, that you don't eradicate the tendency for people to formulate groups, belief systems , around conceptions of ways that you should behave that are, at the very least, religious in structure and action, even if they're not religious in name; I mean I think it's a very peculiar coincidence, for example, that the Soviet Communists erected at Male Trinity Marx, Lenin and Stalin as an apparent replacement for the masculine trinity that comprised the essential deities of Orthodox, Russian Orthodox Christianity. Why would these forms re-emerge so spontaneously, and what does it mean that people who regard themselves as essentially modern and empirical in their presuppositions seem to be absolutely susceptible in their fundament to ideological claims? Well if you look at the Soviet Union, which I think is a very instructive case because the Soviets, the Russians, were really the last European power to fall prey to the conflict between empiricism and science and religion, and they didn't really fall prey to that until the mid 1800's because Russia was a relatively closed society, relatively illiterate, maintaining a medieval structure far past the time when other European countries had abandoned that. In the 1850's, a wave of atheism spread across Russia, in some sense as a wave of enlightenment, but also as a plague, and figures as powering as Tolstoy remembered in his memoirs the very day that he realized that the empirical discoveries of Western Europeans had eradicated his ability to believe in the Russian Orthodox system. You lose something like that, what happens? Well if you believe that mythological thinking is nothing but superstitious empiricism and that it's been replaced entirely by a more appropriate modern view, then nothing happens, right, it's all to your benefit to become enlightened, but if you believe that there's more to the story than that, and that more traditional, ethical and moral systems predicated on mythological presuppositions offer you a map of how to behave and what to think and how to regulate your emotions and what to strive for, none of which can be replaced by a scientific perspective, then the eradication of a system like that leaves a vacuum, and then the question is, what rushes in to fill a vacuum? Well if you look at the case of the Soviet Union, it seems quite instructive, doesn't it. I mean, there's a thirty-year period where there's tremendous intellectual clash, say between a materialist, an empirical perspective, and in Russian Orthodox perspective. The Russian Orthodox perspective loses its attractiveness for the reigning intellectual elite and the presuppositions of communism which appear rational by contrast, but which, by all evidence, were not, rush in to fill the gap, and I want to read you something that Nietzsche wrote, it's perhaps the most famous thing he ever said, although it's almost entirely taken out of context and misquoted, and if not misquoted, at least misunderstood, because Nietzsche was one of these strange people who was capable of living 50 or even 100 years into the future, and although he was, is, generally regarded as an enemy of Christianity and superstition, and was certainly an unbelievably outspoken of Christian... opponent of Christian traditionalism, he also knew that if you let the old Gods die, the probability that blood would flood the land was virtually 100%, so let me read you what he wrote with respect to precisely this point: Have you not heard of that mad man who lit a lantern in the bright morning hours, ran to the marketplace and cried incessantly, I seek God. As many of those who do not believe in God were standing around just then, he provoked must, much laughter. Why, did he get lost, said one. Did he lose his way like a child, said another, or is he hiding, is he afraid of us, is he going on a voyage or emigrated, thus they yelled and laughed. The mad man jumped into their midst and pierced them with his glances. Wither is God, he cried, I shall tell you. We have killed him, you and I. All of us are his murderers. But how have we done this, how were we able to drink up the sea, who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon, what did we do when we unchanged this earth from its sun? Wither is it moving now? Wither are we moving now? Away from all suns? Are we not plunging continuously backwards, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is there any up or down left? Are we not straying as though through an infinite nothing, did we not feel the breath of empty space, has it not become colder, is not night and more night coming on all the while, must not lanterns be lit in the morning, do we not hear anything yet of the noise of the grave diggers who are burying God, do we not smell anything yet of God's decomposition? Gods, too, decompose. God is dead, God remains dead, and we have killed him. How shall we, the murderer of all murderers, comfort ourselves? What was holiest and most powerful of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our knives. Who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean ourselves, what festivals of atonement, what sacred game shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must we not ourselves become God simply to seem worthy of it? Well as you can tell, that's a much different notion from the casual God is dead quotation that's most generally associated with Nietzsche . Well what is he saying? Well he's saying something like this: A system like Christianity, or any system that's con, that's oriented a society for thousands and thousands of years can't simply be, be eradicated by a casual gesture without consequences ensuing in its aftermath. What consequences? Well Nietzsche says, well we'll no longer know up from down. What does he mean by that, metaphorically? Well up, that's where you're headed, right? And down, that's what you want to stay away from, and when you eradicate the most fundamental presuppositions of your system of values, then there is no up and there is no down, and then where are you precisely? Well it's not so easy, it's not so easy to say, having not necessarily ever been in that position. What is your life like when you don't know up from down? Is it merely neutral? Is, is there merely no value left, or could it possibly be the case that if up and down have both been eradicated, that the place that you're left in is something much more akin to a permanent state of suffering, because maybe it's only the case that the constant capacity to strive for up, and being an up that you believe in, the constant striving for up is actually what makes your life normal to you, and if you lost the sense of up and down, the place that you would end up would be not so much neutral as terrible. Now if you have any belief system at all, you do this, so let's say you're an advocate of left wing politics, you take a pro-environmental stance, or an anti-corporate stance, which is a relatively common thing to do among undergraduates. What do you do when you hold that belief system? You view the world as it lays itself out, and you explain the manner in which it manifests itself in terms of the axioms of that belief system, and you may know that you can do it, right, you can tell a credible story about why the world is the way it is by adopting, say, an anti-corporate perspective, because there are all sorts of terrible things about the world that are a consequence, say, of corporate maneuvering, and you might also say that, and Piaget would say this, that it's a necessary developmental stage to acquire allegiance to a given belief system. Why? Well any up is better than none, that might be the first observation, so even if your belief system is relatively insufficient and easily challenged on intellectual grounds and perhaps not very complete anyways, the fact that it does lay out a moral structure and tell you good from evil and right from wrong, that's a, that's a plus, that's an advantage. Now it's relative intellectual weakness and it's incoherence assuming it, it is incoherent to some degree, that's a flaw, but that doesn't mean that the effort to establish a system like that is worthless; moral system. is because they felt that the order Hitler promised repressive as it was, was preferable to the chaos that was likely to ensue in its absence. What is it about chaos that's so terrifying? Second Nietzsche said: adopting a belief system of any sort and imposing coherency on the viewing it through the lens of that explicit system disciplines your mind. So for example to live in the absence of any stated beliefs is hardly to live at all. To live in the presence of a narrow minded and extreme belief system is at least to undergo the rigors both behavioral and intellectual of coming to terms with the world from some perspective. Nietzsche said the reason the modern mind such as it is was able to free itself from the past at all was because it had first thoroughly as a consequence of that subordination to then break free of it. In all science of morals so far one thing was lacking strange as it may sound the problem of morality itself. What was lacking was any suspicion that there was something problematic here. Every society every functioning individual every functioning family every social unit has a moral code. But they differ. So what does that mean exactly what, it's complicated isn't it because the fact of the universality of the code the fact of the code indicates that the code or a code is necessary. By the same token the fact that there's a multiplicity of codes seems to suggest that the particulars of a given code aren't necessarily relevant and so Nietzsche says brilliantly I think we're faced with a problem. No life without morality - no absolute morality. What do we do? One of the things Jung observed was that if you look at the structure of stories we thought first there's a relationship between stories and moral codes. Well seems relatively straightforward doesn't it. You tell a simple story like a parable sometimes they're complex too like an Aesop's fable say. What do you extract out from the story? A moral. and that person does better or worse and the moral of the story is if you act in this manner you will do better or worse. Proverbial knowledge. We all tell stories. They have identifiable structure you can tell that because the movie studio in Hollywood can produce a movie and people all over the world will watch it people all over the world all over the world tell stories to one another. The plot elements seem similar. Are the morals similar? That's a more difficult question, right, we know that the details of morality can vary from culture to culture, is there anything that doesn't vary from culture to culture? Why would you wanna find that? Well Alexander Solzhenitsyn thought that one of the most important occurrences of the 20th century were the Nuremberg trials. The Nuremberg trials brought the perpetrators of the Nazi genocide to justice and that's easy to be cynical about that and perhaps you should be cynical about it and so of course the losers were going to be tried from the perspective of the winner's moral code but Solzhenitsyn says well wait you know there's something more to this story at least there seems to be in that many of the events that characterized the Nazi atrocities were so awful, outside of intellectual argumentation, because you can provide an intellectual argument for anything they were so awful that the proper visceral embodied response of any observer regardless of specific moral code should be repugnant. Period. Such that encoded at least initially in international law genocide is a crime against humanity. Right. No matter what the particulars of your moral code. So goes the logic. You cannot construct a viable moral code that enables genocide, if not a logical impossibility and I think it is a logical impossibility it's an ethical impossibility. And then you have to ask yourself, and this is not precisely an intellectual question, does that seem credible to you. Does it seem credible that there are acts that are so terrible that no one regardless of their stated position should ever engage in them. And if the answer is yes then I would say well if you haven't moved towards personal accept acceptance of an ultimate "up" so to speak you've certainly identified at least one "down" that you don't want to approach. And that's the beginnings of the establishment of some notion of absolute moral authority. So what if we said, hypothetically something like this. Let's say that morality isn't a philosophy, it's not something explicit, something implicit. How does it evolve? Well emotional creatures produce it, you don't have to produce it in isolation if you were weren't a social animal i if you lived a solitary and nocturnal existence,by yourself there's no need for morality because you don't have to regulate your behaviour with regards to your peers but you're social animals so you're stuck with everybody else but everybody else could be conceived us as a grand average right. How would you act towards the average person. I would say that very, very stable moral systems tell you exactly that and the say things like: do unto others as you would have them do unto you. Right? Basic principle of reciprocity. what am I doing that's unacceptable and not good it who knows is distributed sanity you don't have to be that sane, as long as you're hanging around other people because as soon as you do something that's deviant they're gonna raise an eyebrow at you and the you think oh well. Not that. And as soon as you do something good then they're gonna pay more attention and smile at you so all of the information about how to regulate yourself is out there in the world right, the averaged person. How many people do you interact with in a week? 300 say maybe it's not that many, 100. How about in a year, thousand, 2000, 5000, 10,000 what are they all telling you? Well the message is similar across people. How similar. Don't know exactly how similar but that's what stories tell you how similar.
So today I'm gonna tell you the best three stories that I know, I think, and, I think these stories are absolutely, phenomenally potent, and the reason for that is that I think they illustrate in an extraordinarily-powerful way the nature of the processes that led to the establishment of western democratic ideals. Mircae Eliade, whose work I rely on substantially, to make the following argument, has taken western academic culture to task in a manner that hasn't fully been revealed yet. He said that, like all human cultures, the west is parochial and narrow in its viewpoint, and although over the last three hundred years there's been a substantial amount of cross-cultural intermingling and a potential broadening of philosophical and religious horizon, that broadening has not been sufficiently complete; If we build on the viewpoint that I've been developing with you over the last few courses and make the presupposition that religious modes of thinking are more phenomenological than they are rational, which means that they deal more with what you experience, say, than with the objective world, if we look at archaic religious stories through that lens, then they can start to open up, and so, given that, I want to open up three religious stories to you today, two in depth, and one only in passing because we'll return to it later. I'll start with, Judeo-Christian Myth of Genesis, and when I say myth, of course, you all know this already, but when I say myth, I don't mean untruth, I mean a form of knowledge that's narrative in structure and predicated on presumptions that aren't empirical; a myth describes processes of transformation, a myth describes them, a myth describes the process whereby elements of experience come into being and transform On Genesis, the fundamental structural elements of Genesis are the Word of God and chaos, and the Hebrew words for chaos and waste are tehom, for chaos, and tohu, for waste, and tehom in particular, although toho as well, are very interesting words because you can track their derivation historically, and sometimes if you contract the derivation of words historically, you can get some sense of the culture milieu out of which the word sprang, and we know what tyomat means because we have written records of a story that involves a character named Tiamat, and Tiamat is a dragon who lives at the bottom of the ocean; in the oldest creation myth we have, which is the Enuma Elish, the Sumerian creation myth, the Sumeria, Babylon, Acadia, rightly regarded as the birthplace of modern western civilization. In Genesis, two processes unite to produce being, the first of those processes or states is chaos, represented by taom or tohu. The second of those processes is logos, and logos is another word that has an extraordinarily broad range of meaning; it's generally transcribed in the Christian tradition as the word, and it's identified with Christ, which is a very peculiar identification because it's the Word of God that creates order out of chaos and, of course, the Word of God in Genesis is a phenomena that predates the birth of Christ infinitely from a classical religious perspective, so the fact that the two beings are identified as of great peculiarity and also of great interest. The fundamental story of Genesis is something like this, and it's perhaps the most brilliant contribution of Judeo-Christian thought to world history, its total impact is virtually incalculable. The idea is this: that chaos can be conceptualized as something that has an essentially feminine aspect as a matrix, and a matrix is a structure from which other structures emerge, and the story in Genesis makes the hypothesis that logos, which is the Word of God, a phenomena associated with speech and communication and logic, logos: logic, rationality, courage, exploration, all combined into a single entity or trait: logos, the combination of logos and chaos is what brings order into being; that's what the story in Genesis means; it's not an empirical description of the origin of objects, it's a phenomenological description of the origin of experience, the idea being that without the piercing glance of whatever consciousness is, whatever the background of experience is, the matrix, chaos, cannot be conceptualized as real; it takes the interplay between the feminine principle, chaos, and the masculine principle, logos, in order to produce being. Now that's of substantial importance when you give some consideration to the fact that immediately in Genesis, after the establishment of livable order, the deity yahva identifies the individual human being with logos, right, made in God's image, that's the essential characteristic of the human being, and what that means is that the logos that operates in human beings, which is this capacity to make order out of chaos, is identical to the principle that gives rise to the cosmos from a mythological perspective, so it partakes of the deity in a very direct sense insofar as being itself is dependent on its operation. Now it's still possible to claim, given that perspective, that a story with that sort of structure is superstitious and that it doesn't bear any relationship to what reality, what actually constitutes reality, but you have to understand that that story, old as it is, is predicated on older stories, and it's on the ground that those older stories establish that our entire concept of natural rights rests, so if you believe that natural rights have an existence more than merely arbitrary, the reason you believe that is because they're predicated, those rights are predicated on the ideas that are expressed in these myths, Okay, so now we're gonna go back in time to Sumeria, and I'm gonna show you how the Sumerian creation myth lays itself out, and not only that, I'm going to describe to you the direct political implications of the Enuma Elish, the Sumerian creation myth, because the political implications of that myth are well understood because the political structure of Sumeria was directly associated with the structure of the myth because the Sumeria was regarded as the earthly represent of the highest God in the Mesopotamian Pantheon, whose name was Marduk, so insofar as you were emperor, the reason that you were emperor, and the, this is what gave your sovereignty legitimacy, right, 'cause sovereignty has to have legitimacy otherwise there's constant revolutions. What gave sovereignty legitimacy in Mesopotamia was the identification of the emperor with Marduk, and that had, that had certain implications for the emperor, which we'll discuss in some detail So the story starts like this. You've got this Dragon, Tiamat, and Tiamat is a great primordial beast, who lives at the bottom of the ocean. And the ocean is water and water is associated with the primal element in archaic thinking and I told you, there's reasons for that already. or if you viewed the transformation of deserts as a consequence of rain, you can understand why water would be considered the element that gives life, right, that the element that, that brings life forth, and we know from an evolutionary perspective that that's accurate. And we know that we're 90 per cent water and so to consider water the primal element is no trivial conclusion. No, no less than presuming that the sun is the ultimate source of light, the ultimate god, because the sun is the ultimate source of life as far as earth, as far as we're concerned on earth, right, because it's the source of all our energy. These aren't stupid concepts, all right. So Tiamat is this horrible creature that lurks at the bottom of the primal element, all right. Now she has a husband, Apsu. Now the Mesopotamian creation myth doesn't say much about Apsu. We only know that he's the male consort of the Dragon of Chaos. And we know from reading other sources of mythology that the male consort of the Dragon of Chaos generally represents either logos or culture. So we're gonna make the presupposition in this particular case that the husband of Chaos is Order or Culture, okay, and then the Mesopotamians don't say much about that, that doesn't, the development of the idea of Apsu or Order or Culture, doesn't take new force until the ancient Egyptians and we'll talk about them today too. Okay so Tiamat and Apsu are locked into a kind of sexual embrace according to the Mesopotamian creation. What does that mean? It kinda means two things. It means that they're not really distinguishable because they're locked into this embrace and it also means that they're up to something creative because the act of sexual congress in mythology is most usefully, is most frequently utilized as representation of something creative or as representation of the probability of some new form coming to be, right. All right. So Apsu and Tiamat are locked into this embrace in a state that other creation myths describe as egg-like, the Pre-Cosmogonic egg, their intermingling gives rise to the initial state of being according to the Sumerians and the initial state of being according to the Sumerians is characterized by the dominion of the elder gods These gods, being none too bright, make a tremendous amount of racket, doing things. Well what does that mean exactly? Well it means something like this. They make a lot of racket and they cause a lot of trouble. They make a lot of wind and all of their racket and trouble and wind and activity rouses Tiamat. What does that mean? Well it means if you do things, you get in trouble. It means even if you're trying to solve problems, you get into trouble because the solution to a problem tend, tends to generate a whole bunch of new problems, right. It's like the Hydra. So what it means is that it's more or less fated that any form of activity whatsoever is likely to produce the threat of catastrophe And of course we're absolutely keenly aware of that in the modern world because we're possessed by this sense that all of our frenetic activity, all of our frenetic motivated activity is producing alterations in the world order such that Nature itself is going to be destroyed and eliminate us, right. That's classic Sumerian fear. Nothing's changed in the last 5,000 years. The Sumerians presumed that once the elder gods where constructed and started moving around on the planet, that their activity their mindless activity, because remember these aren't well integrated motivational forces, they're more like primordial beasts, right. Their unintegrated activity risks plunging everything back in Chaos. Well Tiamat's the representative of Chaos, this generative Chaos, but so what if the Sumerians say, "Well the elder gods cause a lot of racket, they move around the planet and they upset Tiamat," and she decides that enough is enough and she's gonna wipe them out. So she's sitting at the bottom of the ocean, fuming away, as the elder gods go about their business and then they take one step too many and they kill Apsu, who's her husband. Now the Sumerian creation myth doesn't say much about this, but we know that Apsu is the male consort of Chaos. That makes him Order. So what happens is the elder gods destroy Order itself. They destroy Culture itself and as soon as you destroy Culture, all hell breaks loose and that's exactly what happens in this Sumerian creation myth. So Tiamat emerges, he's gonna wipe everything out and the world will revert back to its primordial, non-existent state. Now the, all the gods get wind of this and of course they're just terrified because they know that this thing that gave rise to them, whatever it is, the matrix of being, can easily wipe them out at a moment's notice and so despite the fact that they are transpersonal and immortal and characterized by a certain amount of power, in the face of absolute Chaos, they're insufficient. Now this occurrence is extending over a protracted period of time and as the elder gods are threatened, they're also breeding and mating and producing new forms. And they produce a great, great grandson, whose name is Marduk. Now Marduk has a lot of very interesting attributes. So the attributes are described in the Enuma Elish in the following manner, so this is what Marduk's father sees when his wife, Damkina, gives birth to Marduk. "So when he, who's Marduk's father, saw his son, he rejoiced, he beamed, his heart was filled with joy. He distinguished him and conferred upon him double equality with the gods." Okay, so that's that first indication that whatever Marduk represents is something that's elevated beyond the normal status of a primordial deity. "So that he was highly exalted and surpassed them in everything. Artfully arranged beyond comprehension were his members, not fit for human understanding, hard to look upon, four were his eyes, four were his ears. When his lips moved, fired blazed forth. Each of his four ears grew large and likewise, his eyes, to see everything. He was exalted among gods. Surpassing was his form. His members were gigantic. He was surpassing in height. Mariyutu, Mariyutu." One of his names. "Sun of the sun god, the sun god of the gods." Okay. Complex bit of poetry. Says a bunch of things. It says well whatever Marduk is, is the offspring of the gods. Whatever Marduk is, is characterized by heightened awareness. Right? Because he has four ears and they're large. Whatever Marduk is characterized by is the status that surpasses that of his fathers. Whatever he's characterized by, is associated with the power of speech, real power, because when he speaks, fire spurts forth. Marduk is also huge, but more importantly, he's associated in this particular poem with the sun. Why is that? Well the sun dominates consciousness, right, because we're conscious during the day. Most of our brain is visual cortex, so we're visual creatures. So when the sun rises is when the day begins. So Marduk is also associated with whatever deity dominates the day and that's the deity of consciousness. And there's more to the story of the Sun, right, because the Sun is also something that rises and sets repeatedly and that means that the deity that dominates consciousness is characterized by a cyclical nature. That's a Sun myth. Sun rises in the morning renewed, as a consequence of fighting a terrible battle in the night with the enemies of everything that's associated with consciousness. A classic solar myth So Apsu and Tiamat give rise to the world of the gods. The activity of the world of gods reawakens Tiamat, she decides to destroy everything, but at that moment the gods give birth to Marduk. Now that's a typical motif which is that the hero's always born at the time of maximal crisis and the reason for that is in part, it's simple. Look, if your culture is dealing well with the forces of the unknown, so that everything is static, but, static but productive, so that problems themselves don't arise, there's no reason for the hero, right, there's no reason to confront the unknown. It's only when crisis beckons that the birth of the hero is necessary. Marduk constitutes the birth of the hero. and they say, "Look, you know, we're in real trouble unless someone goes out there and confronts Tiamat straight on, she's gonna wipe everything out, it's a dangerous and terrifying job, but somebody has to do it. And Marduk says, "Oh that's no problem but I got a few rules here and this is the first rule, I'm in charge from here on forward." What does that mean exactly? Well these archaic stories are polysemus and, or polysemic in Northrup Frye's terminology and what that means is that they can be read validly at multiple levels of analysis simultaneously. And so one thing it means is that if you take the 2-year-old child who's essentially under the Dominion of assorted primordial gods and goddesses. Right? Aggression, fear, panic, and according to Freud, a certain degree of sexual aggression. The child moves from motivated state to domination for motivated state It isn't until the age of 3 and 4 when, under the pressure applied by the social world and as a consequence of the maturation of the prefrontal cortex, which matures throughout childhood and adolescence and doesn't reach its final form until perhaps into the early 20s, all of those fundamental motivational forces start taking on a structured relationship to one another, which is to say that once your, as your personality becomes integrated, a single motive force forward has to bring all of these underlying motivational systems into some sort of harmonious arrangement. Okay so let's, let's see what the Sumerians are doing here. Okay, first of all they're, they're doing psychology. They're trying to figure out, given the dominion of the, the elder gods, the indisputable dominion of the elder gods, Instincts, who should rule? Right? What should be in charge? How do you construct a hierarchy of values? And then more complexly, when you integrate a state, which is what the Mesopotamians did, right, the first great civilization, what does that mean? The first time hundreds of tribes were hammered into some sort of stable, hierarchical order, how do you represent that order? "So Marduk gets his act together, the gods all meet in a huge chamber, they elect him king and then they prepare him for battle. When the gods, the fathers, beheld the power of his word, they were glad and did homage, saying 'Marduk is king'. They bestowed upon him a scepter, a throne and a royal robe. They gave him an irresistable weapon, smiting the enemy saying, 'Go and cut off the life of Tiamat. May the winds carry her blood to out-of-the-way places.' After the gods, his fathers, had determined the destiny of Marduk, they set him on the road, the way to success and attainment." So then he goes to the "heart of darkness" so to speak and confronts Tiamat, accuses her of treachery and challenges her to battle. "When Tiamat heard this, she became like one in a frenzy and lost her reason. She cried out loud and furiously. To the very roots, her two legs shook back and forth. She recited an incantation, repeatedly casting her spell. As for the gods of battle, they sharpened their weapons. Tiamat and Marduk, the wisest of the gods, advanced against one another. They pressed on into combat and approached for battle." Okay, well things don't go out so well with Tiamat from this point forward. The first thing that Marduk does is encapsulate her in a net and I think that's a really interesting metaphor because that's essentially what human beings do when they encounter the unknown, right. They encapsulate it in an explanatory network, so it's a way of binding up the, the anomaly, or the unknown, and giving it a substantive form. "Then he cuts her into pieces and then he makes the world out of her pieces. In fact one of Marduk's names is 'He Who Makes Ingenious Things' as a consequence of the combat with Tiamat." Now that's very, very interesting because what it means is that the Sumerians are presenting in metaphorical form the notion that when the chips are down, the survival of being depends on the capacity of whatever Marduk represents, the solar god, to encounter the matrix of being, to cut it into pieces and to make the world and if you think about in those terms, it's a very, very straightforward story, right. It's basically the story of human beings, fundamentally the story of human beings, because we, in the words of a famous evolutionary psychologist, whose name completely escapes me, we occupy the cognitive niche, right. Our mode of being is creativity in the face of the unknown and when Chaos threatens the established mode of being, it's necessary for us to put our creativity into action and to carve out new territory as a consequence of encounter with the unknown. Why? Well because we can take the world apart with our hands and put it together in new ways and then we can code what we've done verbally and we can transmit it to another person and then they can do the same thing. And we're all doing this all the time and we're all telling each other how we're doing it. And that's how the embodiment of logos in the human being, which is precisely equivalent to the Sumerian notion of Marduk, that's precisely how it is that we're constantly capable of redeeming the world. and that's why you make resolutions at New Year's because the new you is supposed to be born at the new year. OK, so what do the Mesopotamians do at the new year? They take their king and they bring him outside the city. Now you have to understand that outside the city is chaos, right, because these are city states. When you go outside the dominion of the human, you're in chaos. And then the priest makes the emperor kneel and takes all his marks of status off him so he's reduced to his essence fundamentally, bereft of his social persona, and then he slaps him with a glove and humiliateshim and the king is forced to recount his sins, right, everything he did in the last year that wasn't up to Marduk standards, so to speak. And you can see, that'd be a pretty useful thing to have somebody who's in power do on a regular basis, right, because it reminds them that they're in fact subject to a trans-personal structure whose nature isn't precisely evident but is nonetheless there, which is the case. Act like Marduk or all hell will break loose and demolish your kingdom, which of course is true now, as it was then now. So the emperor gets humiliated, he has to recount his sins, then he's locked up, then he Re-enacts the battle with Tiamat and when he emerges victorious, he's locked up with a ritual prostitute, a hierodule, and they mate. Why? Well, the Hierodule, the ritual prostitute, represents Tiamat. Now why the hell would that be, because Tiamat's a dragon, right, a horrible man-eating dragon that lives at the bottom of the ocean which is to say that in any encounter with the unknown, as difficult traumatic and violent as that might be, there's also the possibility for something creative to emerge as a consequence, right, because it's out of the unknown that we mine new information So insofar as the Mesopotamian emperor acted out the role of Marduk, then he was a good emperor, then he deserved his sovereignty and literally as well as figuratively, insofar as he did play that role, then the society was going to remain not only stable but constantly updated because he's engaged in this constant creative contact with the unknown, aided and abetted by his attempts to remember his own inadequacies and weaknesses and to do something about them. OK, so that's a pretty interesting story and it gets even more interesting when you start to understand that the Judao-Christian myth is assimilated to the Sumerian creation myth by the union of the notions of chaos and Tiamat. So the logos in Judao-Christian thinking, the word of God that produces order out of chaos, is also essentially equivalent - at least metaphorically speaking - to whatever Marduk represents in the Sumerian creation myth. And we know that I mean our relationship with the Enuma Elish is obscured by time but our relationship with the stories that lay out the fundamental sub-structure of western culture is not so ameliorated even though we may not believe them explicitly anymore. They still sit at the basis of our society.
Now one of the things that people are very much confused by in the modern world is what archaic people meant by gods, and that's because whatever the deities were that had the motive force that archaic people attributed to the gods seemed to have disappeared in modern culture. Now the Jungian in hypothesis is that's because they turned into psychological traits, fundamentally, or motivational forces, so what the, what archaic societies would describe as gods, we would describe as motivational forces, so, for example, Venus is a goddess, the goddess of love, and we would associate her power with love and sex fundamentally, and the reason that that's a reasonable association from the archaic standpoint is because the motive quality that makes up what Venus represents is transpersonal, which means it's not limited to one person and it's immortal in that the motive force that characterizes sexual affiliation exists whether or not a single individual exists. so it's transpersonal, has the force of a personality , because, if you fall in love, you're motivated by a certain set of standards and perspectives, right, if you're gripped by beauty, say, or if you're gripped by lust, that imposes a particular view of the world on you and impels your actions, sometimes despite your will, and so that would be equivalent, from the archaic perspective, to possession. And it's clearly the case that archaic societies who are engaged in warfare, for example, would conduct rituals to ensure that the warriors that made up their societies were, in fact, possessed by the correct god, so it might be Mars, for example, the Roman God of War, so that on the battlefield they exhibited the proper characteristics of somebody who was in a battle, right, rage you can think, rage, so possession by the God of War would be equivalent to this possession by a state of rage Now, it's not quite that simple, it isn't only that archaic people externalized motive forces and gave them the status of deities, what they did was more complex than that, and I think you can understand that a little bit better if you start to, if you start to give some, uh, thought to the modern behavioral notion of the stimulus. Now the stimulus is a very, very weird concept, because the behaviourists who were interested in taking apart what was inside the brain would attribute motive force to the stimulus, right, they'd say, if you present an animal with a stimulus, he will therefor act, and that meant that the behaviours were making the presupposition that the motive power resided in some manner in the stimulus. Well and why, why would they think like that? Well, it's an archaic mode of thought in a sense. You can imagine a child saying, um, one of my friends today made me really angry, right, which means that the child is essentially conflating his or her own internal emotional state with the proximal stimulus that gave rise to that state, and you see complex associations like that taking place with regards to the apprehension of beauty, say, because beauty is a very, very complex and difficult to localize phenomena; if you're very attracted to someone, are you attracted by them? Well in a sense, of course, you are, because there they are, but in another sense you're not at all because what's happening is that you're engaged as much in the in attraction as anything that's motivating you from the outside world, and I think that partly accounts for your sense of foolishness, especially if the person that you're attracted to doesn't return your attraction, I mean, you, you know that from your perceptual perspective you're attracted and dominated by the object, but, uh, by the same token, you know entirely that, easy as it is to presume it's them and their fault, say, pretty much it all has to do with you, so in the modern world where we've been able to separate out the object and the motive force of the object, the deities have sort of moved inside of us and become psychological forces, but you can understand if you think about it in this manner that things weren't so clear prior to the dawn of the empirical age, that gives you a little bit of background with regards to what the notion of deity meant to archaic societies who still utilize those notions as explanatory terms. Okay, so we know that if you're caught up in one of these little, uh, world games, that you may be motivated by something very, very fundamental, right, a, a tendency that transcends you the tendency to propagate yourself, say, Freud's fundamental motivational level, sexual affiliation or the tendency to maintain yourself, those you could say are the fundamental gods of existence, the fundamental driving forces, and it's there, it's the interaction of those two forces over great periods of time that produce the great diversity of life and, and human life, that we see before us, and each of those fundamental, most fundamental of gods, have their differentiated minion so to speak so that while engaged in the meta goal of self preservation, you act out plots of hunger and plots of thirst and you move from cold to hot or from hot to cold depending on your particular, uh, on your particular, on the particular temperature of your surroundings or with regards to self propagation. You're attracted to people or are repelled by them for reasons that are frequently absolutely beyond your comprehension by the way, so I just found out this week, uh, and this is absolutely staggering, I think, that if you, um, if you run an experiment on a group of women and you track their menstrual cycle, and then you give them t-shirts that men have worn to smell, that women who are ovulating like the smell of symmetrical men better than A-symmetrical men, so and that's partly because symmetrical men are probably more healthy, but this is a good example of how the motive forces that configure your world are dependent on instinctual forces that are not only beyond your consciousness, but they're beyond even, at the moment, any of our, uh, explicit explanations. So, uh, another finding that's very similar that I came across recently, it turns out that mice will not mate with mice that have RH blood factors that are likely to produce, um, unfit offspring, uh, the more closely genetically related the RH factors, the more likely there is to be a, a, an, a catastrophe with regards to offspring, and the mice seem to detect the RH factor by smell so recently this was run by, with women, and it is also the case that women prefer men whose RH factors are at an optimal distance from them in terms of smell, so this is some example of how these unbelievably archaic systems, 'cause like the old factory systems are unbelievably archaic, produce alterations in world view at a level that's massively below consciousness, so underneath your cortical shell, which is tonically inhibiting all your emotional and motivational systems, lies all these motivational and emotional systems, and they have branches that grow up into the cortex, and they have the capacity to control your behaviour completely and voluntarily, so, for example, if you're gripped by fear, if you're gripped by fear, it's very, very difficult to overcome that voluntarily, and at least initially you won't be able to, which is to say that when the chips are down, the underlying motivational and emotional systems have control. Okay. So then what happens from that perspective, then what happens when you encounter something you don't understand, and I think the best way to explain it is something like generalize disinhibition, which is that all your underlying motivational and emotional systems are more or less disinhibited simultaneously, and the reason for that is because you want to be maximally prepared to do whatever the hell is necessary to do when you are somewhere that you don't understand, and because you don't know what that thing is going to be, all your systems go on, and when psychologists talk about stress, which is an abysmal word, right, it means everything and nothing, when psychologists talk about stress, what they mean is, generalized disinhibition of emotion and motivation so then you come to the case of ancient Egypt And one of the things Eliade points out, which I think is really interesting, I mean really phenomenal, the story I'm going to tell you right now was essentially revealed in Egyptian culture at the dawn of the culture rather than developing over the course of the culture. So the Egyptians had a revelation, right, immediately that the most fundamental of gods was the one who created as a consequence of his tongue and his speech, very much akin to the Sumerian idea with regards to Marduk and also to later Judao-Christian ideas. so here's the story. There's four players in this drama, OK? There's Osiris, his wife Isis, Horace their son, and Seth. And Seth is Osiris' evil brother, OK? Now Osiris was a remarkable guy. He was the founder of the Egyptian state from the mythological perspective, so kind of like Romulus and Remus for Rome, a myth or like George Washington for the U.S., right? A mythologized figure who represented all of the Pharaohs and people for that matter who'd actually constructed the Egyptian state. Osiris, father of Egypt, so to speak, but Osiris is kind of old and a little archaic and maybe a little bit senile and even possibly a little bit naive in that you know even no matter how great you were in your youth, as time goes on you lose contact with environmental transformations and the old rules that you lived by are not necessarily applicable to the present and some of those things that you ignore become paramount in importance. And it turns out that Osiris has an evil brother, Seth, and Seth eventually turns into Satan as mythology develops through the centuries. And Seth is a nasty guy, right, I mean what he wants more than anything is undeserved dominion over the Egyptian state. Now Osiris, because he's not paying attention and because he isn't sufficiently cognizant anymore of the power of evil, more or less ignores his evil brother, who in turn chops him into pieces and then distributes his pieces all over the Egyptian state. Now you might say: why didn't he just kill him, right? I mean you'd think chopping him up would kill him but he's a god, you can't just kill them. The reason in mythology, and you see this in movies as well, where the villain never quite dies or the hero never quite dies, is because even if you eliminate individual embodiments of what those figures represent, new embodiments manifest themselves virtually immediately. So one of the things mythology is quite clear about is that you never win a final battle with evil. It's a permanent property of the world. So anyways, Seth hacks up Osiris, spreads him all over the land. Osiris ends up living a kind of shadowy and nebulous ghost-like existence down in the underworld and Seth becomes the ruler of the state. A nasty story. Alright, but Osiris has Isis as a wife. Now Isis had a huge cult. She was a powerful goddess, goddess of the under world, a kind of combination of Kali and Diana, so to speak, capable of tremendous destructive power but also the source of all good things - something very much like Tiamat. Now Isis got wind of her husband's disintegration, so to speak, and she went searching around Egypt till she found his phallus and with it she makes herself pregnant. OK, so what does that mean exactly? It means something like this. The collapse of any great order brings with it new potential and I think this is something that capitalism has way over forms of government like communism. Capitalism has mechanisms in place to allow large structures that are no longer meeting their function to collapse. But frequently when they collapse, it's not like they disintegrate into dust, right, they disintegrate into sub-components, so to speak, many of which then come to terms with the fact that the order has collapsed and build something new. So you can't get rid of culture so easily. You can hack it up into bits, you can disembody it, so to speak, you can spread it all over the state, you can introduce chaos into it. But that's something that has the potential of new birth like the phoenix rising from the ashes. So anyways, Isis, who's the matrix, who's Tiamat, gets Osiris' phallus, which is the container of the germ of culture, right, the phenomenon that's capable of the seminal idea, and she makes herself pregnant and she gives birth to Horace, who's the long-lost son of the rightful king, right, a very typical mythological motif. OK, so Horace is alienated from the kingdom, which is another very common mythological motif, you know like how King Arthur, for example, is raised by commoners? The same story pops up in the story for Christ, for example, because Christ has heavenly parents but then he also has kind of ordinary parents and it's a very common motif. Anyways, so Horace grows up outside of the classical structure of the Egyptian state, which is tilted terribly towards evil because Seth has dominated, because Osiris was too blind to his evil brother to take appropriate defensive actions, and he grows to maturity. And then he decides, like all rightful sons of the long-lost king, to reclaim his heritage. So he goes back to Egypt, right, and he has this vicious battle with Seth and in the process, Seth tears out one of his eyes. Well, fine, and that's an indication of just exactly how devastating a battle with the forces of evil, so to speak, precisely are. They represent a critical threat to the integrity of consciousness, right? That's why he loses an eye. Well, luckily enough, Horace has got his act together and he does defeat Seth and he banishes him and he gets the eye back. And then you think: OK, great, pop the eye back in, become emperor, everything's fine Now let's backtrack a little bit and think about this politically. Now the Egyptians had this really weird idea. They had the idea that the living pharaoh was the living pharaoh and the dead pharaoh at the same time. makes no sense rationally but it makes a lot of sense from a narrative perspective because what they were saying is something like this: look, you got to think that when you become king, or when you become president, or when you take on a role of that absolute magnitude, that then you're partly you but you're also partly this role and there's really no way out of that, right? And the role is composed of the unbelievable weight of the cultural tradition that you're representing. And you can say: well, that's true for being king or for being president but it's also true if you become a doctor or a lawyer, any sort of specialized occupation. It's partly you, because you're embodying the role, but it's partly the role too. So the pharaoh is the live pharaoh and the dead pharaoh because the dead pharaoh represents culture, right? The king is dead, long live the king. OK, but paralleling that idea was the idea that the pharaoh was not only the dead pharaoh and the live pharaoh at the same time but that he was Osiris and Horace at the same time. But then you think in the story, Horace has taken over Seth, he's got his eye back, he can be king. But he isn't king yet and this is where the Egyptians really get their act together and I think, of the two stories that I'm telling you, this is the one that has the most significance, I think, for modern people because we're so likely to sidestep our obligation to our culture, whatever that happens to be. So instead of popping this eye back in his head, which is the first thing you'd think he does, he decides he's going to go back to the underworld, where Osiris is living in this ghostlike and dead manner, since he's been chopped up by Seth. So he goes down into the underworld, which is no piece of cake, and he finds Osiris there in this kind of half-dead state and he gives him his eye. And that enlightens Osiris, right, it gives him vision and so then he takes Osiris back to Egypt arm in arm, so to speak. And it's the conjunction of Osiris and Horace that constitutes the basis for Egyptian sovereignty and that is bloody brilliant, right, because the Egyptians figured out that so Horace is Marduk, for all intents and purposes, right? He's this avenging hero. In the Egyptian story, he fights political corruption rather than chaos but you can understand that those are two flipsides of the hero archetype, they are. The hero archetype has two basic elements. One is the confrontation of the terrible aspect of nature, chaos in its most brutal form, and the other is the confrontation with the archaic aspect of culture. And in some ways, those aren't distinguishable because if culture isn't archaic, chaos never makes itself present. So which is to say you can't separate out political degradation from environmental degradation, say, it's the same idea. So anyways, Horace has this great idea. He needs his father, right, and I told you about the same motif emerging in Pinocchio, we already looked at that, right? Pinocchio doesn't become genuine until he risks his life saving his father, alright, so the same thing is happening in this particular situation. So that's pretty cool. So then you get the situation where the Egyptians characterize sovereignty as the capability to overcome evil in the political domain, combined with - and that's a youthful capability, right - combined with the wisdom of the past, alright? Then you look at that from a political perspective and you find out already that the Egyptians viewed the pharaoh as the live pharaoh and the dead pharaoh simultaneously. But then you find out something else that's interesting and it gives you some real insight into just exactly how bloody powerful these ideas were. So you think: what did the Egyptians do with their spare time? And then you think: well, they built the pyramids, right, I mean and that was no trivial undertaking. It was sort of the 5000 B.C. equivalent of flying to Mars. And I mean the pyramids are pretty impressive now but they were a hell of a lot more impressive in their original form because they were in the middle of an immense complex. And the pyramids were dedicated to the immortality of the pharaoh and the pharaoh was possessed by a spirit called Ka and Ka was his immortal spirit and it was the union of Horace and Osiris, OK? So Egyptian society was dedicated to deifying the immortal spirit of the pharaoh, the union of Horace and Osiris. And it was the union that gave the, it was this identification with this union that gave the pharaoh a phenomenon the Egyptians called Maat and Maat was like truth or good order. And you could think about it as conscience in a sense is if the pharaoh was utilizing the union of Horace and Osiris, then he would have an intuitive ability to decide what the appropriate course of order was. And so the Egyptians would say, for example, when the pharaoh came into the court, they'd say: the sun has risen by that they meant the power that reigned over the dominion of the night had arrived. They conceptualized maat as the capacity to put order in the place of chaos, essentially formally. So they assimilated the union of Horace and Osiris with the capability of putting order in the face of chaos. They regarded that as immortal and they spent all of the excess resources of their society glorifying that idea. And you think: you don't produce something like the pyramids without really being possessed by an idea, right? This is no trivial undertaking, it's going over a period of several hundred, if not several thousand, years. That takes an awful lot of work. So this idea of the immortality of the union of Horace and Osiris and its association with sovereignty was an absolutely potent idea for the Egyptians. It gave their whole culture motive force. OK, so the Egyptians thought: the pharaoh is immortal and that's the reason why and we more or less partake in his immortality by being his subjects. So that was a pretty good deal. But then Eliade points out something very interesting and this is called the democratization of Osiris and what you found was that initially there were certain symbolic presentations representing the immortality of the pharaoh that could only be used by the pharaoh. But as Egyptian culture continued to develop, then the symbolic representations of immortality started to be adopted by the aristocracy. Now what did that mean? It meant that this process that the Egyptians had conceptualized as integral to the order of the state was no longer solely embodied in the hands of the pharaoh, right? It had started to drift down the power hierarchy into the aristocracy, OK? Well then you think: what happens after that? So by the end of Egyptian society, the aristocrats were characterized by an identity with the union of Horace and Osiris, right? Sovereignty had started to spread itself out. And you think: what starts to happen with the Greeks, right? The Greeks attribute sovereignty to every male Greek. Barbarians, no. Women, no. But at least all males, right? You get a beginning of a democratic notion there. The Jews developing ideas that, if not derived from Egypt, were at least similar in structure to Egyptian ideas, say: not the aristocracy, not the pharaoh but every individual has the capacity of establishing a direct relationship with the transcendent deity, right? Then you have a Christian revolution that follows that where the idea that sovereignty inheres in the individual, is distributed to everyone, right, everyone - male, female, criminal, non-criminal, murderer, rapist, taxman, you name it, sovereignty inheres within them. And it's on that soil that our whole democratic culture emerges - these unbelievably archaic ideas, first acted out, right, first embodied in ritual, first dramatized then only told as stories, developing more and more coherence over stretches of time of thousands of years, not hundreds of years but thousands of years, becoming more coherent, becoming more pointed, becoming more relevant with regards to their embodiment, then starting to become understood explicitly and distributed to the entire society. And it's on that ground that our world rests, not on the ground of rationality, as established in say Europe in 1500. What we have is much more profound and solid and deep than any mere rational construction. It's a from of government, an equilibrated state, so to speak, that's a consequence of an emergent, if not evolutionary, at least social evolutionary process. And I would say that it stems much farther back than that because you can imagine something like this. Look, if this ideal personality that should be sovereign is represented by the optimal combination of creativity and traditionalism, say, if that's the optimal combination, and if we're prepared to regard that as optimal, if that's a - if that's what you perceive when you perceive someone that you respect and admire, then you could say that success in our social hierarchies is predicated on the degree to which you actually embody that combination. And then you see an interaction between individual success and the social construction that would be an interaction that extends over centuries or even thousands of centuries so that as these ideas become more and more developed, we become more and more adapted to embodying them as a consequence of evolutionary pressure. So it's not just cultural, it's also biological. So our political presuppositions rest on a cultural basis which is unbelievably archaic, resting in turn on something even lower than that. And I think examples of that are those that I've provided you with already. We know, for example, that chimps who have to live in a dominance hierarchy are very aggressive, especially the males, but they're also very cooperative. So the males who are aggressive spend a substantial amount of time repairing social boundaries in the aftermath of an aggressive incident because they're just as concerned with keeping the bloody hierarchy intact as they are in climbing it. They have to be. And we know that even wolves won't kill a subordinate wolf once they've defeated it. They allow the subordinate wolf to maintain its own existence, right, they have this notion, this procedural notion that - even those entities that appear insignificant may, in some manner that's beyond speech, still contribute to the integrity of the whole. And that's an idea that's very much similar to our notion that sovereignty inheres in the individual, right? We've taken it further. No matter what you do, even if you're in clear violation of the law, your rights remain intact because no matter how outcast you are and how apparently beyond redemption, your existence may still contribute something to the integrity of the whole. And as far as I'm concerned, that doesn't appear to be a metaphorical idea. If you dismiss it, you cannot dismiss it without simultaneously dismissing the ground on which our states rest. And so then you have to ask yourself: are you willing to do that? And if the answer is no, well then you have to start to question what it is that you actually believe, because if you buy the doctrine of natural rights, which you do, you act it out, then all of this follows in its wake, or it rests on sand. And it bloody well better not rest on sand.
Maybe you're 35-years-old and you've never had a job. And one of the things that's stopping you is that you're so damned nervous that you can't pick up a phone and use it, because if anything unexpected happens while you're talking, you get scared so badly you have to hang up. And so, that would be characteristic of somebody with a severe anxiety disorder. So, what do you do with that person? So, you say: Oh, are they afraid of the phone? Well, no. What are they afraid of? Well, they're afraid of anomalies in human interaction, right? And they're afraid of something unexpected happening while they're trying to impose a structure. And the reason they're afraid of that is 'cause they never learned that they were capable of dealing with the emergence of something new on an ongoing basis, which meant that... Well, which meant in all likelihood that, when they were children, they were so sheltered from any contact with those aspects of being that transcend knowledge that they never learned that there was something inside of them that would reveal itself if they were allowed the opportunity to encounter the unknown; to encounter fear, then to master it, then to extract out something of value. So, they can't get a job because they can't use the phone. And it isn't because they can't use the phone, right? It's a deeper story than that. It's because they're terrified of this and they have no idea that they have some resource they could draw on to combat it. And you could say: Well, we can teach them to use the phone, right? Say: Well, you know, here's a repertoire of stock lines that you might use, you know, like small talk at a party. And that would increase what they know and enable them to deal with the unknown. Or you could say: Look, you know, relax a little bit. When the person says something on the phone that you don't understand, pause a little bit. Think about what they're saying. Pay attention to them. Allow yourself the luxury of formulating a response. You'll do fine. And even if you do it badly the first half a dozen times, well, you'll learn eventually. And the person derives from that the notion that, not only can they cope on the phone, but that possibly, there's more to them that originally met the eye We come into the world equipped with an array of... possibilities and limitations. And those possibilities and limitations are expressed most particularly in our physical form; the fact that we have a specific kind of embodied form that allows us to do certain things, and it also doesn't allow us to do certain other things. Lao Tzu has pointed out that it's the space inside a pot that makes the pot worthwhile. And... what he means by that is that... those things that limit you give you as much form and possibility, as those things that enable you. What that means, more broadly, is the fact that you've come to a given circumstance with a set of possibilities and a set of limitations. It's that, that allows you to impose form on what you encounter, so that the whole notion of form is a tenet in some peculiar way that we don't really understand yet on the necessity of limitation. And I think the best way to understand that, or to begin to understand that, is to give some consideration to the notion of a game. So, for example, if you're playing chess, there's a virtually unlimited number of things you can't do, and only a very narrow number of things that you can do. Yet, when you're playing chess, the arbitrary limitations that are imposed on each piece don't seem to be unfair in any sort of cosmic sense. They seem to be part of the structure that enables you to actually play the game. Without the imposition of those rules, which are of course relatively arbitrary in the structure, there wouldn't be a game at all. Now, it's clear that, for human beings, games and fantasy for that matter shade up into reality, so that the game structures that we engage in and the fantasy structures that we use to undergird our stories and our pretend play, say when we're children, shade imperceptibly into real life. WeWe play games because there's something about games that make them deeply analogous to what we do in daytoday situations. And that means, the observation that the rules of a game actually make the game possible is an observation that's broadly applicable to consideration of your own limitation Some of those limitations and possibilities take the form of emotions and motivations, and we know, I think, incontrovertibly regardless of the claims of social scientists who are more relativist in their orientation, that human beings come into the world with a standard set of biological predispositions - emotions and motivations. And furthermore, I think we know that it's the fact of those shared emotions and motivations that allow us to communicate at all. And then, imagine further that a consequence of that... lengthy process of interpersonal negotiation is the emergence of a tremendously complicated game, and not one that's arbitrary, because the game has to have certain rules in order for it to be played at all. So, for example, we know that even with rats, If rats-- They like to engage in rough-and-tumble play, and if you put two rats together - juvenile rats - one rat almost always dominates the other. It only takes about a 10% gain in weight on the part of one rat for it to be pretty much stability dominant. And it's always the subordinate rat that introduces play, or-or-or uh, asks for play. But it turns out that even among rats, if the dominant rat pins, or... or-or obtains victory over the subordinate rat more than 70% of the time, the subordinate rat will no longer play So then, you could imagine likewise that if you're going to play a game with some other person, whether it's a game of fantasy or the actual chance to engage in some cooperative real-world activity, unless that person allows you a certain amount of space for the manifestation of your own emotional and motivational needs, you're not going to play the game with them, right? You're going to look for another game. And that means that there's a certain set of difficult-to-describe constraints for all of you on games that you're willing to play before you'll look for another game. Well, and then, you could start to conceive of revolutionary tendencies in that sense, right? Imagine a human society that's got so unstable that the vast majority of the citizens within that society are subjugated to starvation. So, the society never no longer provides their basic needs. And constant tyranny, you could imagine as well, that there's going to be an innate tendency among the members of that society to start hypothesizing about what alternatives might be possible, right; to start dreaming about alternative societies, and then also, to take action if the situation becomes too extreme. And I think this is part of the reason why you see stable mythological motifs across different cultures It's not so much like Jung said that we have archetypes of what might constitute social order, deeply embedded in our unconscious. I think thisthis situation is more externalized than that in that, what's biological is what we bring to the situation - our hopes and our desires, and the fact that we have hopes and desires. Now, I think what happens with stories is something like this; is that, as human societies increase in complexity and numbers - so, they become bigger and bigger - and more and more people engage in the negotiating process, exchanging emotional and motivation information, the pattern that this society takes, if it's going to be stable across long periods of time, starts to become encoded in the stories. So imagine, you got your emotions and your motivations. You make your case known. Ten thousand other people do that over a thousand years, and structure starts to emerge that satisfies, more or less, all of these emotions and motivational states, and is also recognizable as a pattern So then, you could say, for example, considering a story like Moses and the imposition of the Ten Commandments on the ancient Hebrews, prior to his imposition of those Ten Commandments - of course, there were actually many more than ten, Moses - according to the mythological story - Moses spent years, literally years, adjudicating conflict between the people that he was leading. 18 hours a day, they'd come to him with their various problems, saying: We have a dispute. How should it be settled? And he'd settle it. Well, imagine doing that for ten years, right; becoming an expert at evaluating what constitutes an appropriate solution to an emotional problem between two people. Imagine, as well, that as a consequence of doing that for such a long period of time, you start to became-- become to abstract out, lawful regularities in the manner in which people have to interact in order for peace to be maintained. Imagine further that those could be codified in stories but, even more, codified as law eventually when consciousness became capable of grasping, explicitly, the nature of the interactions So, my point is a point very much like Nietzsche's - because Nietzsche said at the end of the 19th Century that it's a mistake to presume that most of our philosophies are rational in nature. And I think that's a mistake that characterizes Western philosophical thinking, at least since the Enlightenment. It's a mistake to assume that there was a chaotic social state upon which a rational order was imposed as a consequence of rational action. It's much more reasonable to presuppose that the order emerged naturally, over lengthy periods of time, and then was interpreted and codified and given structure in a secondary manner. And so, what I'm trying to outline for you in large part is the processes by which that order comes to be. So, you say, first, it's behavioural, emotional, motivational. People, and even animals, communicate in a way that makes their motivational and emotional needs known to one another. So, even among wolves and chimpanzees and any kind of lower-order social animal, you have the emergence of dominance hierarchies, fundamentally, which are stable solutions to the entire set of emotional and motivational problems that besets the group. And no one would ever say that the emergence of a chimpanzee dominance hierarchy is a consequence of rational deliberation. So then, imagine that chimpanzees get the power to watch what they're doing and to start to represent it. And then, imagine furthermore that that representation takes the form of stories and, then, laws. And then, you have some idea about h-how human social order comes to be. And this is an exciting possibility for me because it offers-- it offers the potential solution to one major question, which is: How is it that people should act? And because we're essentially rationalist in our presuppositions, we believe that there are rationalist solutions to that. But the solutions may be something that are much more akin to biological solutions. So, first, I want you to consider the following hypothesis. OK, so, we're going to make the presupposition - a couple of presuppositions that I don't think are unreasonable - first, is that we are essentially animals, that we've evolved in a Darwinian fashion; and second, that the consequence of that evolution - much of which was precognitive, right - uh, that we-we were around as creatures before we were capable of thinking in words, to say, much of that evolutionary history has conditioned the manner in which we think. So, we think more like biological entities than we think like computers. Or, we think more like biological entities than we think like rational machines. But of course, we already know that rational machines cannot think very well, except in very bounded environments, 'cause they don't have access to an embodied structure or to emotions and motivations. So, let's... So then, you might say: Well, why is it that, like, in the Mesopotamian and Egyptian creation myths, our most fundamental representations of the world tend to take story form and that, not only do they take story form, but they tend to utilize certain kinds of categories. Now, I've showed you this diagram before. Uhmm, this represents what I think are the three cardinal categories of experience. So, there's the great mother who's holding the world in her hand here. And inside her subordinate - in a sense - is the great father. This is a Christian representation obviously. And then, the tragic son of course, in the crowd here representing society, is adoring the figure of the tragic hero here because they regard his mode of being as necessary to their own salvation so to speak - their own proper mode of living. OK, so then, you think: Well, why these characters? And I'd offer you this possibility is, first of all, every human being that's ever lived has lived in an environment characterized by the presence of these three entities, right? We have mothers. We have fathers. And we exist as individuals. And then, you think: Well, when you're a child and you begin to comprehend the world, the outside world, everything outside of the family is of course vague and ill-defined, right, non-existent in a sense. And all there is for you to observe is the mother, who for you really is the whole world, and the father, a-a secondary source of comfort and trouble perhaps, and the fact of your own individuality. And so, you say: Well, that's true from the perspective of individual development. But then, if you go way, way back in history - maybe 500,000 years when our cognitive capacities were first starting to develop - and we were trying to figure out what the world was really like, what categories would we have at our disposal to start to modify and change in order to represent the outside world. And then, you might think: You can only talk about what you don't know in terms that you know. And since, for the child, the mother is the world. It isn't absurd to presume that for the human being, the world is the mother, first, as a projection, right, as an a priori, cognitive schema. The hypothesis being: The natural world which of course manifest itself in truth in the mother - partakes in many ways of the same properties as the mother. It's a working hypothesis, just like you might presume if you date a new woman, that she has aspects of your sister - all things considered - aspects of your mother, given that they were also female. You take what you know to represent what you don't know. So, we use our fundamental, social cognitive categories initially to portray the world. And the world's nature is portray and personified, or metaphorical form. And so then, the question is: What are the primary categories? Well, we have three of them here. But they're not the only three because this is all good, this category system - the benevolent mother, the benevolent father, and the hero. Well, we know the world is not only benevolent, it's also malevolent. Or at least, we can say that because we're equipped with certain emotional possibilities and certain motivational possibilities the probability that we will encounter despair and frustration and disappointment, and anxiety is just as real as the possibility that we will encounter and hope, and satisfaction. So, for us, the world is bivalent. It takes with one and it gives with the other. And that's true for the natural world, which produces us and destroys; as it is for the social world, which fosters our development and crushes our individuality; and as well for the individual, who in many regards is as admirable a creature as you can hope ever to propose and, at the same time, someone who's capable of unbelievable depths of depravity. So... a world that's not only divided into three fundamental categories, but each category divided into a structure that's essentially ambivalent in its fundamental element. And of course, that poses the central existential problem for human existence, doesn't it? I mean, we're faced with the vagaries of the natural world and what we don't understand; he vagaries of the social world and its often arbitrary and unreasonable demands on us; and the fact of our capacity for transcendence, tied to our own vulnerability. And you could say perfectly reasonably that, regardless of where you're situated in time and space, those are basically your problems. And your goal through life - your path through life - is going to be characterized by the solutions you either come up with or don't come up with to that set of problems. OK, so, there's one more categorical element that complicates this picture. And I think, in many ways, it's the most difficult thing there is to grasp. So, we'll take a shot at it first. And I've showed you this representation before. This is the dragon of chaos, and you can think of the dragon of chaos as a symbol of totality. And furthermore, you can think of it in relationship to this structure... as the source of this structure... or even as the source of all structure. So, you see in the Sumerian creation myth, for example, the character of Tiamat, right? And I told you that the world Tiamat is associated with the later Hebrew word "Taom", which means chaos. And Taom is the chaos that Yahweh makes order out of; makes the world out of. So, the idea lurking behind the Sumerian creation myth - and then, later, lurking behind the entire edifice of Judaism-Christianity and Islam for that matter - is that something that can be best represented by this figure is best conceptualized as the ground of everything that exists. Now, what in the world can that mean? Well, it means something like this. Let's look at the concrete metaphorical representation. And first of all, you have a kind of totality here, right? You have a thing that can live by devouring itself. So, it has no need of anything outside of it. In fact, there is nothing outside of it. It's a figure of absolute totality. And it's characterized by a strange intermixture of metaphorical representations of matter - because a snake is something that crawls on the ground - and spirit - because a winged serpent is something that can fly and, therefore, partakes of the metaphorical realm of heaven - heaven and earth, right? Totality--Yin and Yang, from the Daoist perspective. That's the entire world. And it's also something that's characterized by the capacity for transformation because a snake can shed its skin and be reborn. So, it's something that's constantly renewing itself, despite its absolutely archaic age. And it's also something that presents a terrible danger and tremendous opportunity, because a dragon is something that will burn you if you get anywhere near it, but also hordes a treasure that's more valuable than anything else. Eliade has pointed out that in traditional, classic creation myths - the Sumerian myth being one example, the hero when he encounters the first the great dragon of chaos he first either runs away or is paralyzed by fright. The world in itself is a complex array of patterns. And those patterns manifest themselves in space, and they manifest themselves in time. And I think the best way to get a grip on what those patterns might be like is to think of them in terms of music. And I think that's what music represents. Music is this complex three-dimensional structure, full of interwoven patterns of different dimensions and length that expends itself over time. And if you listen to a piece of music, you can concentrate on one instrument or another, or you can concentrate on a phrase, or you can concentrate on the entire melody or the voice. You can parse out different elements from the complex background. And that's especially the case with very sophisticated orchestral music, right, which is susceptible to multiple reinterpretations, and multiple encounters, because of its complexity. And this is to say only that what you look at is far more complicated than what you see. Or to say, alternatively, that there's more information in anything you perceive than you can ever get complete access to. And that's partly because, It's partly because your perceptual systems delude you. So, we think you look with your eyes or with your other senses. But that's only true when you're looking at what you already know what to look at, right? When you've already built perceptual machinery that enables you to detect a particular object. But when you're looking at what you don't know what to look at, the way you look is by getting nervous, right? It's not-- It's not precisely a perceptual function. It's something much more deeper and primordial than that. And it's more like: Oh no. Something that I cannot categorize - either perceptually or cognitively - something that I do not know how to respond to has just occurred. And the first categorization is this: That's it. There's-There's nothing under that. It's merely fear plus heightened attention. And that prepares the ground for constructing a more detailed representation. But that first encounter, that's the encounter with the dragon of chaos. So then, you take this figure - the source of all things, the... the Dao in some ways - and you say: Well, how does it manifest itself? And the answer to that is something like this: And, we see this both in the-- in-in the Mesopotamian and the Egyptian myths that I described to you. The first division of the great dragon of chaos, or the primordial egg is always into two subordinate elements: The great father, and the great mother. Why is that? Well, it's illustrative of a fundamental-- of the fundamental binary nature of existence, I guess; partly, you could say: If you're a cognizant being - a defined delimited being - what you perceive always has a binary structure. There's the aspect of you that structured enough to allow the perceiving. That's what you know. That's-That's the manner in which you're structured so that you can even... so that-that you can even formulate a perception - something a child builds up over time from the primordial aspect, say, of his visual system or his auditory system; learns to parse up the world by generating machinery that allows the complex patterns that make up the world to be turned into objects. So, there's the thing - the structure that allows the perceiving and then, there's the thing that's being perceived or the thing behind that. And this is a very complicated distinction. You can say: Well, what's the difference between the dragon of chaos - say, the representation of the cosmos as such - and the great mother? And I would say, it's something like this... The unknown that appears in relationship to a perceiver is different than the unknown as such. So, I would say this, for example: There are going to be things that surprise you that wouldn't surprise me, and vice versa. And the things that would surprise you have to be construed in relationship to what you-- to what you already know, 'cause you're only going to be surprised by things you don't know. And likewise for me, I'm only going to be surprised by things I don't know. But what we know is going to vary somewhat. So, the unknown for you is going to be different than the unknown for me. And the great mother is a representation of the unknown for you, for the unknown for me. Different for everyone in some sense, because we're all going to be... We're all ...all-all going to be stymied and stalked by different aspects of being; but the same, as well, in that when you encounter things you don't understand, and you encounter things you don't understand, in many, many ways, you're going to react to those different things the same way. And I can give you a narrative illustration of this. King Arthur's knights-- They sit around the round table. They're all equals, that's why they sit around the round table, right? They have a king. The king determines their destinies, like Marduk does. But they're still all equal. They determine they're going to go look for the Holy Grail. It's the symbol of redemption. So, they're off to find the highest value, like, Pinocchio wishing on a star - the highest value. And they all enter the forest to begin their quest, but they each enter it at the place that appears darkest to each of them, right? So, that means they all go on different-- They all go in different directions; even though they're on the same quest that theoretically, they're inhabiting the same space. So... so, it's only to say that every person has their demons, so to speak, and that those demons differ from person to person, even though there are things you can say about the demons that are common across people. So we know, for example, from clinical work - from endless clinical work - that if you want to help someone, you identify: OK, what do you want to do? 'cause they need to know that, right? And that's this. What do you want to do? Where do you want to go? What kind of structure do you want to impose on your world? And then, you identify: OK, well, what things are stopping you? What things are stopping you? So, then, you look back at the Sumerian creation myth and you think: Well, there's Absu, right? God of the Known, Tiamet's Consort, right? Culture, but there's also Marduk, and Marduk is the power - the spirit, the entity - a representation of the Sumerian saviour who goes out to confront this and to make the world. Well, that's what you teach people in behavioural therapy. You teach them not so much that. You don't teach them habituation. You don't teach them to get used to things that they're afraid of. You teach them that there's something within them that can respond to the things that they're afraid of - that's of as great a magnitude as the fears themselves.
You know, when a computer starts up, it has to boot - bootstrap, is what that means. And that boot straps itself by continuing to engage in more and more complex processes as it starts up. So, it starts up with a simple process, and that triggers a more complex process. And that triggers a more complex process, and that way, the computer boots itself into existence. Well, that's exactly what we did, except we did it over like three billion years, right? We started out as these unbelievably simple organisms that can pretty much do nothing at all, except replicate and develop much more and more complex forms over this tremendously long period of evolutionary history, right? So, that's how we solved the problem that you can't know anything without knowing something, and that you can't have knowledge without generating it. It's: A little knowledge, a little more generation. A little knowledge, a little more generation. A little knowledge-- this huge spiraling process that expends-- extends over vast amounts of time; information encoded in your body, right, and as part of your-- as part of the nature of your being; and information encoded in your culture, reflected inside, you enacted out in the world. And as scientists, you know, with this 500-year history of science behind us, we always believe that it's the material substrate of things that's the reality. But it is more complicated than that, because even the material substrate that we consider as scientists isn't merely unformed stuff, right? It has structure. It's patterned. It's full of information, and there are physicists working now who believe that conceptualization of the ground of being - the material ground uh, of being - as information is a more fruitful metaphor than conceptualization of the ground of being as like unformed matter. It's not unformed, right? It's patterned and regular. Informative so that if you investigate it, it reveals order as not just a material structure. So, if you go back to Democratus, right, the person who originated the atomic hypothesis, Democratus actually says two things - not one. He says: Everything's made out of atoms - little bits of stuff. But the other thing he says is: Atoms array themselves in space array themselves-- And what that means is that the atomic structure of things is patterned, and that the pattern is just as real as the atoms themselves. It's the pattern that's the knowledge, right? It's the pattern that's the information. So, what we encounter as conscious beings is this complexly patterned array, which we then turn into knowledge - useable knowledge. I said: Well, how would this metaphorical representation work? And so uh, the way I want you to look at this figure is like this: Imagine this as distant, right, as lurking in the background. So, this is the ground of all being manifesting itself as one primordial archetype, or one, one metaph-- one standard motive metaphorical representation. Why this figure? Well, this is complicated, I think. If you show men a picture of a beautiful woman with her eyes averted, while you're doing a brain scan mapping of their nucleus accumbens, nothing happens. Why is that relevant? Well, the nucleus accumbens is part of the underlying emotional circuitry that governs approach behaviour and pleasure. And approach behaviour and pleasure are very tightly intertwined. If you show the same man a picture of a beautiful woman with her eyes locked on his, his nucleus accumbens will light up. Why is that? Well, it's partly because men are innately in-- attuned to hu-- to female beauty. Female beauty has a standard form. It's replicable cross-culturally. It constitutes the average human... human female form. But more than that, the gaze-locking is an indication of shared attention. And it's also the indication of the initial establishment of a shared attentional space. And it's an invitation, and that invitation activates approach circuitry, even if it's just a picture. So, and you can see this if you walk into any drug store, or any-any s-- any drug store that sells magazines. What do you see? Well, in the men's magazines, you see an infinite array of beautiful women. And in the female magazines, the women's magazines, you see an infinite array of beautiful women. Now, just exactly why is that? Well, there's something absolutely compelling about female beauty. And then, you have to ask yourself: What the hell does compelling mean? OK, so what compelling means is: You're busily engaged in a goal-directed task and something happens in your peripheral vision, so to speak, that attracts your attention. Now, that attention is attracted by processes that are fundamentally unconscious; which means, processes that occur before you can think. So, you can imagine a loose collection of college-aged males having a conversation in a bar, when someone beautiful walks by. And one or more of them catch her out of the corner of their eyes. Orientation, right? Unconscious. Why? Because there's something about that pattern form that grips attentional systems and directs observation towards it. So then, you think: OK. Human beings are really, really complicated pattern processors. And you think: Well, partly what we're trying to get a handle on here is the nature of the world. And partly what we know already is that there are aspects of the world that you can't understand always. And then, you think: Well, people are trying to get a grip on the fact that there are parts of the world that you can't understand. So, that there's this transcendant element to being that always escapes encapsulation. How would you represent it? Well, it's the transcendent element of things that always attracts your attention, implicitly, beyond your control. So, loud noise or a scream, or the cry of a baby or anything horrific, right? Blood, broken bodies... These are stimuli that are so representative of trouble that you can't help but attend to them. And then, you can imagine that all the stimuli, so to speak, that you can't help but attend to, can be amalgamated into representations of... the transcendent aspect of reality. And that's what you see in this representation right here. So, you see a weird intermingling of female sexuality, plus some very distinct genital symbolism. Why genital? So, imagine that that's a vulval opening. Why? Before we had any scientific knowledge at all-- let's go 10,000 years ago. What the hell's inside a body? Well, we knew that, I guess, a little bit from hunting, right? We knew the interior of a body. What is it about the interior of a body that allows new forms to be generated? How is it that mothers can give birth to children? How is it that one form, that's complex and attractive and mysterious, can give rise to another form? Why is that useful knowledge from a representational perspective? Because there's some association between the feminine form from a metaphorical perspective, and the capacity for nature to give rise to new forms. And then you see a representation of a typical monstrous form that's Kali the Hindu goddess the devourer and in this representation so she's like a more developed version of Tiamat that's a good way of thinking about her. She's not so much unspeakable anymore, you can actually say a few things about Kali, you could say well she's like a spider because she has 8 legs and she weaves a web of fate and you could say well her web is made out of fire because if you get too near to her you'll burn up. And you could say she glares at you with eyes that are unblinking and you could say she has a tongue like a tiger and you could say that she carries weapons of destruction and has a headdress of skulls and that her hair is on fire. And you could say that she's giving birth to this guy as nature gives birth to human beings and is devouring him at the same time. Intestines first. And then you could say well you could imagine that the first few people that made a representation like that shocked themselves quite badly, right because this is a this is a representation of fear itself in a sense not exactly it's also a representation of those stimuli that if you're human are going to make you both afraid and compelled just like it's hard to look away from fire even if it's burning something down, you want to have it around. Rats if you raise a rat to juvenile status and then waft in cat odour it will completely short circuit, why? Well the rat's never seen a cat so exactly what the hell is it responding to you think well you could say well it's not a conditioned stimulus because the rat's never encountered a cat there's something deep in the brain of that rat that knows something about cat odour has never encountered a cat so exactly what is it perceiving well in some sense I think the notion that it's perceiving is wrong it isn't perceiving, it's just going like this. That's the representation. Well with chimpanzees who are more complex there are other stimuli that evoke exactly that kind of response chimps don't like snakes. Dead or alive plastic rubber doesn't matter they don't like snakes if you put one in their cage they get as far away from the snake as they can as quickly as possible and then they look at it. Because I suppose if you're a chimpanzee even if you don't like snakes it's a good idea to know where they are right so it's simultaneously repelling -- Ahh snake! -- plus attractive well you better look at it and see where it's gonna go. Chimpanzees don't like unconscious chimpanzees so if you knock a chimpanzee out with anesthetic and you bring the body of the chimpanzee back into the chimpanzee cage the chimps do exactly the same thing away from the body but they look at it they don't like masks made of chimpanzee faces. Well 3 year old kids don't like masks either. there are these underlying perceptual primitive so to speak that likely activate lower limbic mechanisms in our brains that say to us this is a place suddenly where something that you probably do not like or will not like is very very likely to happen so you can imagine that an environment characterized by unconscious bodies or blood or the presence of spiders or snakes etcetera might be a place where a primate such as yourself may encounter things that they don't know how to cope with therefore afraid, right same with fear of the dark, and then you can imagine that the dark is populated with all of these monsters of the unknown and you get some notion of what's happening to children who are afraid of the dark, why are they afraid of the dark. Because in the dark which is the place you don't know lurk things that could hurt a creature like you. What things. Well we can't exactly say, but if you give children exposure to books and to adult conversation and the television soon those limbic structures that are populating the darkness with unnamable fear start to populate it up with skeletons and vampires and monsters and so forth and so on. the representational structures that the brain is capable of generating say well fear-inducing things are like that they're bloody they're dangerous they look like serpents they look like insects they lurk in the dark they sneak up on you etc. all mangled together into some sort of monstrous form. Now I wanna read you a story. So lemme give you a little background on this story. This story popped into my head in one chunk like complete which I thought was kind of interesting but... it was also a story that emerged in solution to a problem I'd been thinking about for a long time because I was dealing with this guy who didn't wanna grow up, so he's caught in a kind of Peter Pan situation and Peter Pan, pan means everything, pan like pantheistic. And Peter Pan is a child who won't grow up now he's magical well okay fine children live in the magical world right they're ripe with possibility, he's magical. He doesn't wanna grow up. So he lives in Neverland with the lost boys, Neverland doesn't really exist and the lost boys are obviously boys who haven't managed to establish some mode of being and he's in constant battle with Capt. Hook and Capt. Hook's a tyrant right a pirate a negative a manifestation of the negative archetype of social order. Hook is always fighting Peter Pan because Peter Pan represents childhood and vulnerability and he doesn't wanna be vulnerable so they're locked in this sort of eternal battle. and lots of people I think more commonly men but not necessarily, get caught in this Peter Pan problem So I was dealing with a person who was caught in this situation didn't wanna grow up wouldn't sacrifice childhood. And so this story popped into my head. It's called Cockadoodledo Once upon a time there was a man who had a long hard journey ahead of him. He was trudging along the way over waters and through brushes when he saw little shiny gnome with big white teeth and a black toupee sitting by the side of the road. He was drumming on a log. With two white bones and humming oddly to himself. The little gnome said John, why work so hard why walk so fast. Who knows if you'll ever get there anyway. Come over here I have something to show you. So John walked off the road. He was sick of walking anyway because people kept throwing sticks and stones at him. Little gnome said I have a shiny red jewel that I would like to sell you. Cheap. Here it is. And from beneath his cloak he pulled the biggest ruby that the man had ever seen. Must've weighed 100 pounds and shone like the sun. The gnome said, do you like it. It's an enchanted stone, what will you offer me for it. And the man said. I don't have much, much money but I'll give you everything I have. And the gnome looked displeased. So John added I could pay some more monthly. So the gnome accepted, fair enough buy now pay later, sounds good for me, I'm all for the installment plan. So the man gave the gnome all his money and promised to pay the rest later and the gnome walked back into the bush by the road clacking his teeth and giggling and twitching. The more the man thought about this ruby and the great deal he got the happier he became, he started back on the road with a light heart but soon discovered that he couldn't make much progress because 100 pounds was a lot to carry. He said to himself why continue anyways I have what I want, I'll just stand here holding my ruby and when people walk by they could see how well I've all ready done. So he stopped. A little while one of his little while later one of his friends came along saw him standing there. His friend said John why don't you come along with me. I've just opened a new business and I could really use some help, come along quick. It will be opening soon. John thought that sounded good. But his friend was in a hurry. Besides couldn't he see the ruby? How could he speed along beside him where would he put his jewel. So he said thanks but I have to take care of my jewel. Maybe I'll see you later. His friend looked at him like he was crazy but he was trying to get somewhere quick so he just shrugged a bit and said okay John see you later. And he sped on down the road. Little while later another friend came by and he said John nice to see you. I'm going back to school. There are lots of wonderful things to learn, great things to do. The world is full of unsolved problems. I could use some company. Would you like to come along. John thought that sounded pretty good but this friend too looked like he was in a hurry. Besides standing beside the road holding the jewel was tiring and he needed all the energy he had for that. So he said to his friend thanks but I have to take care of my jewel. Isn't it beautiful maybe I'll see you later. His friend looked at him like he was crazy but he was trying to get somewhere quick so he just shrugged and said hope everything goes all right with you, see you later. Many friends came and went and the years went by. The jewel got heavier and heavier. But the man got more and more attached to it. The only thing was nobody seemed to notice how beautiful it was. People would rush by and talk about their plans and nobody had a ruby as big and nobody seemed likely to get a ruby as big if you'd think that someone might have said something like at least nice ruby John sure wish I had one like that but it never happened. Then one day someone new came down the road, he was bent over and he was thin and his hair was gray, although he didn't look that old. He was carrying a big dirty rock carefully in his arms and he wasn't making much progress. The strange figure approached and glanced up at John, then he grinned and said, why are you standing there so stupidly with a big ugly rock in your tired old hands. You look pretty daft. I bet you wish you had a big ruby like the one I'm carrying and John thought this poor man is deluded, he's carrying a rock. I have the ruby so he said excuse me sir but you were sadly mistaken. I'm the one with the jewel I met a little gnome by the side of the road and he sold it to me. I'm still paying for it. Although not so very much, you are carrying a rock. The tired stranger looked annoyed said I don't know what game you're playing mister you have a rock I have a jewel. Little gnome you described sold it to me. And he said it was the only one. I've been carrying it for 20 years. And I'll never let it go. And John said but I'm been carrying mine for 20 years too, it can't be just a rock. Rock or jewel on and on they argued. Suddenly out stepped the little gnome as if he'd never left. Only this time he wasn't so little he was bigger and redder and menacing and his laugh sounded like the rattling of chains. Quit arguing you two. I've never seen a sight quite so pathetic. You're carrying rocks, both of you. And if you would've ever had the sense to put them down for a second or two you would've seen that. Oh well at least you were diligent. I played a mean trick. I feel bad. So I'm gonna give you what you really deserve. Do you want what you really deserve? And John and the thin stranger nodded eagerly, finally they thought. You haven't seen anything yet. Throw down your rocks. So John and the thin stranger obeyed. Each rock split down the middle and it hit the ground, out flowed a river of ravenous white worms which rushed towards the men and devoured them whole while they thrashed about and screamed. Soon nothing was left except a legbone from each. The little gnome picked them up and walked off the road. He sat down by a hollow log and started to drum. He drummed and he waited. And he hummed an odd little tune. Picture of food feeds the whole hungry clan, the image of good makes the whole healthy man, why walk for miles why do the work, just smile the smile, success after all is a quirk, life isn't real that's the message I give. It's easy that way, plus who wants to live? So needless to say the guy that I was telling this story to never listened to it and things really didn't go well for him for a long, long time, and they really didn't go well for him until he was willing to give up some of the things he was carrying along so he had acquired for example a number of things that he couldn't afford. And the fact that he was carrying them right paying for them month after month, meant couldn't afford to get an education was perfectly willing to sacrifice the possibility of getting an education for the image of success. Rather than the reverse right and he was completely irritated at the world because he had all these trappings of success which no one he admired also admired and he absolutely wasn't getting anywhere and he thought that was tremendously unfair. But the truth of the matter was that had he put down what he was carrying for even a moment and he would've been able to get to where he wanted to go. And that's a motif that succinctly and dramatically describes the necessity for sacrifice. Now one of the things you see in psycho therapy very very commonly is that the person who's coming for help does the same damn thing over and over and over and every time they do it, it has the same consequence. Bad. So they end up with the same kind of they end up in the same kind of relationship. Right starts out well then the person turns against them and starts to abuse them they get abused repeatedly then it ends then they meet someone else and the cycle continues doesn't seem to matter who they're out with either they pick a person like this or they turn the person into someone like that they lose jobs the same way or their educational hopes fail the same way, why, well the person thinks man... the structure of the world is so unfair everyone else seems to be getting along just fine but me I get hit in the head over and over. Exactly the same way and then you think well... what is the structure of the world, exactly and then you remember well you know there's the things you don't understand and the things you do understand and the things you do understand structure you and protect you but you know sometimes the things you do understand aren't the right things, you're valuing something you're carrying something that's an impediment to your further progress and it's frequently the case that it's the kind of impediment that under no conditions do you wanna give up because there's something about you that says like John says about the ruby, look, it's a ruby, who the hell cares if it weighs 100 pounds and I have to stand by the road I still got the ruby, and all you'd ever have to do is put the damn thing down and wander off and everything would be just fine but you won't do it, why. Because you don't wanna give up what you know. Because you don't wanna sacrifice anything. Well, long before people had any psychological acumen or any psychological knowledge they all ready figured out that if you were gonna take on a figure like this and expect to get absolutely anywhere with her right the horrors of the world, you bloody well better be willing to sacrifice whatever's necessary to keep you going along your path right unfortunately the things that you have to sacrifice are often those things that you're most particularly compelled by or gripped by or value the things that you wanna give up least. Which is why in archaic societies where all this is dramatized people sacrifice an animal that they value particularly. Or eerier than that even a child that they value particularly right dramatically portraying the idea of sacrifice you have to give something up if you wanna make an inroad on what she represents. And so then you say the purpose of sacrifice is to turn the terrible aspect of the world into the benevolent aspect of the world and this is Diana not a Hindu goddess but a Greek a Roman goddess same idea applies in the Hindu case if you make the appropriate sacrifices then the terrible aspect of the world turns into the benevolent aspect of the world. And it is the case that even empirical studies of success indicate that intelligence is a handy thing to have, but hard work and dedication is a handy thing to have too and what that means is that you're constantly willing to sacrifice the impulsive pleasure of the present for the hopes of payback in the future. For example the sacrifice immediate gratification to obtain an appropriate social role take your place in society. It's definitely a sacrifice right because you put off pleasures in the moment to obtain long term stability and productivity. To turn the world into this. And so then you can say, this is how the world falls apart as it's explored right so first of all there's the thing that you can't even name that only fills you with dread and but also with the sense of possibility and that manifests itself in your life as something concrete. That you don't know promising and threatening and that divides itself up into those aspects of the world that you value and admire and that hold promise for you, and those aspects of the world that don't and that's a differentiation as a consequence of exploration. It's not a differentiation of the world into objects though it's a differentiation of the world into categories of emotion, those things that are good for you those things that are bad for you and the source that they're derived from. That's the background of the world. We'll stop!
We've had written history for 5000 years. People have been generally literate for less than 500 years. But we've had culture for 150,000 years. Identifiable culture for at least 25,000 so the vast period of our enculturation was preliterate enculturation before we could write down the rules and transmit them. How were they transmitted assuming we had culture well there's a variety of mechanisms. we have a tendency to see elements of the world in personified form because most of the inter relationships we have with the world are actually social or interpersonal relationships so that's basically how our brain is structured and as we evolved we developed the capacity to extend our cognitive ability beyond the merely social to take in the world as such but the categories that we use to do that was still fundamentally social. Now the reason the unknown per se is symbolized as feminine is because the critical feature of the feminine and I don't mean the female individual I mean the feminine category is its capacity to generate new forms. And the unknown is such is is logically and appropriately symbolized by the feminine because it's the bringer forth of all things which is to say that the background of existence the unknowable background of existence is the thing that generates everything. paired with that of course according to the schema that we've been working with is the archetype of the great father. and the archetype of the great father is the archetype of tradition fundamentally. The great weight of the past because as you incorporate your past the past of your culture through the intermediation of your parents you learn routines and rituals for structure in the unknown now those routines and rituals are patterns of action that you use in the world as such. And also a complex patterns of action that you use to structure your own interpretations and your own motor output and your own conceptualizations when you're dealing with other people and so that would be the absorption the most fundamentally of your cultural rules and the fact of those cultural rules and their incarnation in you essentially keeps chaos at bay which means if two of you share the same cultural structure, assuming you're playing the same game so to speak that means that you can each predict each other's responses which is very, very useful because that way you can be sure that you can trust the other person you can more or less infer their goals because after all their value structure's similar to yours and if you can infer their goals that means you can embody their emotions, So that's the benevolent aspect of tradition right the part that protects and shelters you and structures the nature of your being in the face of existential terror and doubt so to speak but there's also an aspect of tradition that's terrible, tyrannical. it's the part that marches young men off to war say in defense of the structures that it's protecting. It's the part that says when you're a teenager wear this and not this or you'll be the target of mockery for all your peers. It's the part of the structure that crushes the creative life out of you because the tyrannical aspect of social order doesn't want your creative life so to speak what it wants is your obedience because your obedience is what makes the machine run smooth and so you're always in an ambivalent relationship with regards to security to authority on the one hand it provides you shelter and what you need and allows you to gain the benefits of literally thousands and thousands of years of cultural evolution. On the other hand it's the thing that makes you obey or face the painful consequences thereof which can range from mere social exclusion and consequent reexposure to the unknown to truly oppressive practices designed to make you be exactly like everyone else or else. And so you could say most particularly again that that's a standard existential problem it's a problem that's faced by people in every place and in ever culture, balancing the appropriate attitude towards culture So the most fundamental representation of culture can be portrayed essentially in this manner I think. And what you see here is the dragon of chaos of course lurking in the background and what that means is that all forms come from the formless and that the father itself is a primary form a representation of God the father and God the father in the Christian trinity is the representation of the positive and the security and the tyrannical aspect of social order right God has a set of rules for you, you bloody well better listen to those rules if you don't all hell's gonna break loose and you know that's a pretty reasonable summary of how things work unfortunately. so on the one hand God offers security on the other hand he offers tyranny and in total that basically represents order so you can see this representation is quite useful; shows God's standing over this city which of course is a city committed to him fundamentally so it operates under the moral principals that he represents and behind him is a representation of the sun which is partly a representation of the source of all life partly a representation of the source of consciousness and illumination right because you're conscious during the day and partly a halo representing a sort of transcendent nature of the of the social order that structures existence so it's a primary phenomenon and it's only to say that in all human experience there's a cultural aspect and a natural aspect and a funny thing is the cultural aspect in some ways is as natural as the natural aspect right because we're social beings we can't exist without society, society's structures as our very nature. And we're beneficiaries and victims. And so then just as the case - just as is the case with the feminine there's a two aspects that can be represented metaphorically with regards to the masculine you can say well the secure aspect of social order is the wise king and you can see it written in medieval representation of him here sitting on his throne calmly in a relatively open posture that means he's ready to listen to supplicants to people who are coming to talk to him. He's holding an orb with a cross on top of it which means essentially that he's in control of the world and that the world is subordinated to something else that's represented by the cross. A wise and just ruler and then his mirror image here is the son devouring king a very common mythological theme the father who wants to destroy his son and shades of the Oedipal conflict in that of course if you remember your Freud but basically what it means is this is that despite the fact that every human being is an offspring of culture by nature, every human being is also in the terrible position of facing the fact that their very individuality is likely to be crushed out of them during during the socialization process. And in a sense that's really not an that's really not avoidable I mean if you're subject to really tyrannical socialization it's obviously a much more cardinal problem right but even if you're subject to socialization under normal circumstances you are still what you are rather than the many fold things that you could've otherwise been and just to give you some sense of how dramatic a process this really is one of the things you should know is that you actually die into your brain so one of the things you might wonder is why is it that death evolved it doesn't really make up much sense from a Darwinian perspective, right because you'd make the presupposition that if you could just stick around and father children say for 250 years you'd be doing a lot better job than the poor sap who only lived to be 30 so why is it that you only live to be 70 and really your period of fertility is over say by the time you're 40. Why would that be what's the utility of death? And then you remember well the environment's always changing right in this chaotic manner that's represented by the great mother. Can you change with it and in answer to that is yes but only to a certain point. Which is why as people age they tend to become more and more alienated from the current culture right they've they've adopted their position of being say which is a more or less fixed by the time they're 25 or so once their pre frontal cortex matures and then after that the world gets away from them they don't have enough biological resources left to constantly undergo new revolutionary neurological processes and part of the reason is this. You have more neuro connections in your brain when you're first born than you do for the rest of your life, any other time in your life and as you learn when you're an infant and as you learn say over the first two years what happens is that there's a plentitude of circuits and they die off leaving only those circuits that have a function and you think about that it's kind of a quasi Darwinian process. And so what that means is that as you mature and become fixed in your form you know to adopt your personality whatever it becomes, what's happening is that the excess possibility in some sense is being demolished by experience. So the tyrannical aspect of enculturation is something that's real because it makes you in large part what you are. And you have to understand as well that that's necessary because it's better to be something, in the final analysis it's better to be something than to be nothing. But you know we still have residual dreams like those expressed by Peter Pan say who's the boy that never wants to grow up because he doesn't wanna attain any final and fixed form and it's interesting because in one respect as you progress through your life you're climbing assuming things are going well you're climbing to ever new heights but on the other hand the direction that you're going in constantly narrows as you age so there's a real trade off there and I think the existential angst that's caused as a consequence of that trade off is often real. And I also think that adolescents and early adults feel this most intently which is part of the reason why they tend to rebel against social structures in general you know whether it's the military industrial complex or the corporate world or globalization or what have you is that you have these large structures that represent the tyrannical aspect of social being and it's no wonder that the fact of those structures engenders rebellion, it should. On the other hand it's also no wonder that structures like that exist because if they didn't exist then people would have no way of interrelating their social being and we would revert back to the sort of Hobbsian state of war where everybody's arms are around everybody else's throat. That doesn't mean the payoff is always good. So... the Freudians of course had a real field day with this, and we're most fundamentally concerned by it. part of the reason that Freudian psychology has had such an immense impact on western and world culture is because Freud came along just when classical Judeo-Christian mythological structures were on the on a serious decline in the west and Freud stepped in with a secularized mythological version of reality which said well there's nature and that's the Id right that's the wild and untamed impulses that spring up from the animal mind and there's the ego which is the individual whose in many ways a pawn of these id like forces and then on top of the ego crushing it down into the id so to speak is the superego which is the internal and external embodiment of social order and morality so you can see the mythological substructure underlying Freud. Freud said well ego is always being shaped by the superego and always compulsion it's "don't, don't". It's always "no" it's like Old Testament morality and the incarnation of the ten commandments. Whatever you wanna do if it feels good the probability is high that it's immoral from the perspective of the social world and you can really see this with children you know it's really remarkable to watch them because my sense is and I don't think this is just because I'm a particularly tyrannical father is that children often get in more trouble for having fun than they do for any other reason because their capacity for unbridled enjoyment is so unbridled that it actually poses a threat to orderly structure so you know if a child really gets in an active mood and is playing a very active game I mean especially if they're somewhere between say 3 and 5 they can tear your house to shreds and no time no time flat and you're always bawling them out like no, no, no quiet down don't do that. And you know they're smiling away and they're happier than any adult you're ever gonna see in your entire life and you're doing everything you can to push them down so that they're they can sit quietly and read a book or whatever it is you think they should be doing and that's really nasty and horrible but by the same token it's absolutely necessary because if they don't learn to bring their impulses even their impulses their ludic impulses right their impulses to play under control then nobody else can stand them and if they don't get access to the resources there in the social world man they have one dismal life laid out in front of them so anyways so that's an early description of the genesis of the conflict say between the ego and the superego and I just wanted to point that out because it's not just sex and aggression that gets regulated right we can understand why that might happen but it's also playfulness and creativity and spontaneity and all the things that we associated with the joy of being that the terrible tyrannical social structure puts a clamp on. So Jaak Panksepp for example has recently demonstrated that children, boys because it's usually boys who have attention deficit disorder which is generally diagnosed in the school room do much better if they're placed on methylphenidate which is a kind of amphetamine fundamentally but normal kids do better on amphetamines too by the way they can focus better they can focus more and they can pay attention more mostly what methylphenidate does is suppress play so Panksepp notes is that well what's happening with these ADHD kids hyperactive kids is they're more playful more boisterously playful which is tends to be a masculine attribute in juvenile forms of many mammals they're boisterously playful give them a little methylphenidate that shuts down their play behaviour and they can sit down and focus you know and well you can understand how even if you might think that's necessary because apparently many people do you can also still understand that by the same token that probably represents some kind of loss because we like to see kids play and it's good for them besides, so anyways Freud says the ego pops up it's all thrilled to death with the world a superego comes along and shuts it down and that's a fate that befalls all of us and not only that because Freud's a pretty wise man all things considered he doesn't say that's all to the bad he says that's the price we pay for social being and fair enough. you see this happening in children all the time where part of what they do as they mature is to adopt roles so they'll play being a father or being a mother say and what they're doing is pulling in what they see as a as the world view that characterizes parenthood embodying the father playing out the role and trying to organize their motivational structures within observed framework say that the father provides and that's an introjections of social wisdom if you can imagine that the role of father say has a structure like one structure would be well if you're a father and you're around to model then you have to be taking care of the children or at least you have to be there often enough so that you can be a target of modeling and so you can imagine that the spirit of the father that's modeled at least in the optimal circumstances is one that deals out rules and order but that also provides nurturing care and support and that's a kind of story we know fathers who aren't like that and maybe we know fathers who are too much like that but all things considered on the average you have a father role and children attempt to interject that and that's part of the way that they learn to modulate their own motivational resources so for example if the child observes the father and the mother sharing which means taking each others motivational states into account then they can act out the game of sharing with a doll say representing a child and what they're doing is trying to imagine what it's like inside that doll's head treating it like a person, by embodying the potential motivations and emotions states of that pretend object in their own body, and then by trying to organize a high order structure which would be like the tea party where tea is shared a higher order structure where you have a turn because you want a turn because you're thirsty like me and then I have a turn and we both get what we want and we can exchange information and well that's a little bit more optimistic representation of the tyranny of social order that pure compulsion right because what it suggests is there's a way that you can organize the way you are genuinely and the way I am genuinely so that we both are genuine yet we get something more than we would get if we would just fire ourselves and so you think that with kids they like to play by themselves but by the time they're about 3 and a half or four boy they have a hunger for other children and they'll do anything in order to go out and play with other kids so you can say that well if you take all the toys off your bed I'll go let you play with your friend and like the toys are off there in two tenths of a second and they're out the door because they have this primary need to go out and experiment with the social world and in large way in large part that's how they build the complex higher order more abstract structures that enable them to regulate their motive their motivational states and their emotional state without just "no". It's a more sophisticated way of doing it right it's better to play a game with someone than to engage in a battle of wills with them. Because then there's no compulsion there's just mutual participation and that's critical because one of the things that the notion of the tyranny of the social order brings up as a question is all right all right so you have to take part in society. You have to take your part in the social world, yet the social world wants its pound of flesh or its 60 pounds of flesh depending on where you live. On the one so you're damned if you do so to speak and you're damned if you don't what do you do as a consequence of facing that challenge and so you remember with the great mother with chaos and the unknown the way you meet the challenge is to understand that the things you don't understand are dangerous and frightening and that if you encounter them they can hurt you and that this is real but you don't run away all the same if you're trying to get somewhere the things you don't understand happen you can't shut yourself down you have to explore cautiously and try to gain new knowledge. Well how do you organize your social being well let's make the presupposition that you got half a dozen or so fundamental motivational states right so what they are is your subjugation to a world of apriory deities. You see in children rage fear, hunger anger affiliation, love, the capacity of play all value sets. Which have their own goal like behavioral patterns their own world view their own way of manifesting themselves all those are innate they're all dependent on pre wired neural architectural systems. They have to unfold in experience but they're there. Okay and so let's say that's what you come into the world with and that's what you come into the world with but then the fact that you're in the world poses a more complex problem which is well yeah you've got one motivational state happening you're angry. But then you've got another you have to worry about which is you'd like to be affiliated with someone. Like your sibling so you got a real conflict with your sibling it's like you really hate them but you really like them too and you wanna play with them so what do you do about that? Well you'd say a behaviourally disregulated child who isn't well socialized they're impulsive. They don't they don't act as if they take the future into account so they heavy future discount their impulses what does that mean. if you watch a child have a temper tantrum which around two they're really prone to it's like it's a phenomena it's like a tornado on a real small scale. Child's just flipped out if you saw an adult do that you'd run away screaming right. And, they're completely dominated by this emotional state. And my sense watching that has always been to try to help the kid not have that happen to them because it looks like a terrible catastrophe for their emerging ego right I mean they're trying to get their world together and something frustrates them and (WHOOMP!) up come these amygdalic projections that govern the anger hypothalamic even more primitive and just like blow them over and then they're on the floor and they're holding their breath and they're turning blue and they're having a fit and then it takes them like 15 minutes to recover. So they have to take themselves into account as total as complete beings and that's the emergence of a higher order morality but it's more complicated than that because not only do they have the problem of themselves which is a bad enough problem but then they have the problem of the other person. So what's the proper response of the individual, given that he or she is threatened by the natural world and the unknown on the left hand, and threatened by the social order and its tyranny on the right hand, but also dependent on the natural world and chaos for all good things and all new information, and dependent on the social order for their very mode of being, right, caught between four paradoxes all at the same time. How can that route be properly negotiated? Well, and then you can look at hero mythology, and the most common plot, and I would say in some ways the only plot, although there are variations of this that are endless, romantic variations or adventure story variations, or variations of failed heroic endeavor. Still the only plot goes something like this: there's a current state of being, now that can be represented by a psychological state, your current personality, it can be represented by your family, it can be represented by your extended social group, your city, your town, your country, your ecosystem, your, your, your, in science fiction frequently the entire global community, right, a structure is threatened; by what? Well, you name it. If it's dangerous, it can threaten the structure. That can be one of various forms of barbarian, right? Any person from another culture, an alien in science fiction, a terrible monster that lives in the deep that had been dominated and oppressed before but has come back for more, an agent of horror, that's a common theme in modern horror movies, right? An object that moves, the ghosts in the basement because the dead were improperly buried, etc., etc., etc., anything uncanny, anything fear-inspiring, anything reptilian, anything that smothers or entrances, or seduces, or you name it; if it's change or some metaphoric representation of anything that can change, then it's this, the dragon of chaos, and that's the thing that always threatens the stable state in its multiple potential manifest forms, and what does that mean? It means the apocalypse is always happening, right? the end of the world is always before us, which is why you see apocalyptic images, for example, throughout the new testament Christ says: "The world is coming to an end", and people are waiting around for it to happen, but what they don't precisely understand is that the world is always coming to an end, always, and that's because what you think now is not good enough for the next second, right, you have to change because change is coming, and what change means is you have to let go of what you know; that's the apocalypse, and it's always on us. The structure is threatened. Well what do you do about that? Well, you can run, but you can't hide, right, that's the theory, and the reason for that is that even if you are unwilling to face the threat that's right in front of you, no matter where you run to that threat's going to be there, and so you see in the case of a aggrophobic woman who starts to run away from the shopping mall when she has heart palpitations that then she runs away from the subway, and then she runs away from taxis, and then buses, and then other people, and, and then finally she's at home and there's nowhere to run but her heart's been palpitating, and the fear of death is still on her, and there's no place to go, so hiding isn't much of a help. or you can pretend that the chaotic thing isn't there and refuse to change, but all that does is make the threat bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger, so just like, simply put, well say you only have a hundred dollars in the bank and you have a hundred and ten dollar telephone bill, and you think, well I, huh, I'd like that hundred dollars, I'm not gonna pay that telephone bill; it's just a little threat, right, but then you don't pay it, and the next month it's a hundred and twenty-five dollar telephone bill, and then they slap a fifty dollar charge on you, and then they cut off your phone, so then you don't have a phone, then you miss a job appointment, and that's not so good, and then it's two hundred and fifty dollars to pay your phone bill and another two hundred to get it hooked back up, and then your credit record goes all to hell because you haven't paid any of that, and then you can't buy a house when you're 25, and you think, kind of weird, eh, little bitty chaos turns into a great big monster, and partly that's because everything that looks separate from everything else isn't, it just looks that way, and when you ignore anything, especially if it's impeding your progress, you know it's impeding your progress, you know you have to deal with it, step away from it and see what its true nature really is, so you can hide, and you can not change, or you can pretend that the threat doesn't exist, but in the final analysis that just stores up the catastrophe for later.
I think of all the stories that we've investigated so far, all the fundamental myths of creation that we've investigated so far, the two that we're going to talk about in detail today are probably the two stories that have had more impact on the course of world history than any other two. I'm going to talk in some detail today about the story of creation laid out in Genesis and also the story of the Buddha's enlightenment. Both stories are also characterized by a kind of depth that's virtually elimitless. And I think in some ways that the topics we're going to discuss today are the most enlightening of all the many ideas that we've traveled through so far in this series. So, we're gonna be concentrating on an analysis of this schema again. The idea being here of course that the world of experience, which is the world that mythology is attempting to describe has these fundamental constituent elements, one associated with chaos or nature or the unknown, one associated with culture or the great father or the predictable. And another associated with the archetypical son, the individual who's the offspring of the interplay of these two fundamental forces But given that part of the purpose of this series is to elucidate the causes of war and motivation for war, attention paid to the dualistic nature of the individual is of, of paramount importance. So we could say that just as nature has it's terrible side and just as culture has its terrible side, so the individual has his or her terrible side. And the depth of that, capacity say for atrocity and vengefulness is just as deep as the depth of terror that the unknown itself holds. I think this is a difficult, a difficult fact for normal individuals to grasp, given that we're highly motivated to view ourselves as, if not precisely good, at least as relatively harmless. But the evidence that as individuals we are relatively harmless is very, very thin indeed. And I don't think it's possible to understand the depth of motivation for atrocity and social conflict without coming to terms with the capacity for evil that's characteristic of the individual. Now both the story in Genesis and the story of the Buddha's enlightenment, lay bare in many ways the nature of the structure of individual evil. And also not only it's structure, but its motivation. Why it is that people would turn more or less voluntarily away from the good and embrace what can only be described as it's polar opposite. So in addition to making reference to this structural schema of course, we're also going to be discussing it's, the typical mode of interaction of these elements of experience. You may note for example that this diagram with which you're now very familiar, the notion of order, chaos and reestablishment of order also parallels the structure of the story in Genesis, the creation where human beings are created first and exist in a paradisal state. That that paradise is disrupted as, as a consequence of some, some event of virtually cosmic significance, that as a consequence of that disruption people are destined to live a profane existence in constant wait for the next state of order. So just as this is a fundamental archetypical structure so that fundamental archetypical structure is, constitutes the, the basic grammar for this story in Genesis. Now what we're gonna do to begin with is to describe precisely how this idea of paradise, descent and the search for paradise is illustrated symbolically in Genesis and exactly what those symbolic representations mean. The idea here being that the reason that the authors of Genesis, the multiple authors of Genesis extending over thousands and thousands of years chose those symbols as not because they were labouring to be obscure or not because they were establishing a pre-empirical representation of reality, a kind of quasi scientific representation, but because these symbols have an elusive or metaphorical richness that enables a story, although short to be characterized by an almost infinite depth. That's part of the reason. The other part of the reason is that when you say something profound, you say it using the language, the clearest language that you have access to. And if the story is almost unutterably profound, then the images in which it is enshrouded are almost incomprehensibly complex. It has to be that way because if the target of the investigation is reality itself, something so complex that we cannot conceptualize it fully, then the language that we use to represent that reality has to stretch us to the limits of our ability to understand and it is the case that the story in Genesis say as much as the stories of Buddhist enlightenment constitutes an artistic endeavor on the part of the human race to portray the nature of human reality and to explain the behavioural and philosophical consequences of that reality. That being a tall order perhaps we should forgive the multiple authors for only being able to manage it in a way that's essentially imagistic and dramatic, rather than explicit, logical, philosophical and fully developed. So the first thing I'd like to point out to you is to, is a statement made by Eliade, which I think is one of the most enlightening things I ever read. Now, the first thing that Eliade does is describe the universality of flood mythology. But then he puts a twist on it. So the idea behind flood mythology is something like this, if societies deviate from an emergent, a necessarily emergent kind of morality, a kind of morality that takes the viewpoint of all the inhabitants of a given society into account, if a society deviates from that viewpoint sufficiently, it dooms itself to annihilation. That annihilation being represented mythologically as the flooding of the society by the precosmogonic waters, the primordial element or chaos. So societies that are tyrannical doom themselves to eradication by chaos, a simple equation. But made more complicated by Eliade, his observation that more than one factor plays a role in the establishment of the tyranny. On the one hand there's straight degeneration of cultural presuppositions in that if you establish a state or a game, which has particular rules, because the environment is constantly transforming itself, the rules by necessity become out of date. So merely as a consequence of the progression of time, the presuppositions on which any state are founded tend to become less and less relevant to the current environment. Okay. So there's this aging and senility merely as a consequence of thermodynamic processes. But then Iliad also points out that there's one additional factor which has to be attributed, not to society, but to the individuals that make up that society, which is that the strictures and rules on which society was founded can be constantly and carefully updated when necessary, If all the individuals that make up that society are perfectly willing to confront exemplars of emerging chaos in their own lives when those exemplars emerge, which is to say that it's perfectly reasonable to be guided in your personality by the structures of your state. But if you face something unknown that those rules cannot handle, it's a moral necessity and obligation on your part to face that emergent anomaly forthrightly to solve it if you can, and then to communicate the consequences of your solution to the rest of the members of your society. Now what Eliade points out is that the individual who, who removes him or her self from the responsibility of confronting their own anomaly speeds the process by which the state decays. So the decay of the state and the possibility for the emergence of chaos is an interaction between the tenancy of the state to disorder, the tendency of the state to, archaism and senility merely as a consequence of change and the voluntarily the voluntary unwillingness of the citizens that comprise that state to face the unknown courageously when it confronts them. So Eliade says: that the deluge myth, deluge myth is almost universally disseminated. It is documented in all the continents, although very rarely in Africa probably because of the relative shortage of water. And on various cultural levels. A certain number of variants seem to be the result of dissemination, first from Mesopotamia and then from India. It is equally possible that one or several diluvial catastrophes gave rise to fabulous narratives, but it would be risky to explain so widespread a myth by phenomena of which no geological traces have been found. That majority of the flood myths seem in some sense to form part of the cosmic rhythm. The old world, people by a fallen humanity is submerged under the water and sometime later a new world emerges from the aquatic chaos. In a large number of variants the flood is the result of the sins or ritual faults of human beings. Sometimes it results simply from the wish of a divine being to put an end to mankind. The chief causes lie at once therefore in the sins of men and the decrepitude of the world. by the mere fact that it exists - That is, that it lives and produces - The cosmos gradually deteriorates and ends by falling into decay. This is the reason why it has to be recreated. In other words, the flood realizes on a macrocosmic scale what is symbolically affected during the New Year festival. The end of the world and the end of a sinful humanity in order to make a new creation possible. So then the question might arise logically enough, what is it that would motivate an individual to work to avoid anomaly when it emerges in his or her own life. And to risk an eventual flood. And even more profoundly, what would motivate an individual perhaps to work for the antithesis of order, to work to promote the emergence of chaos, since we know that people are relatively ambivalent in their moral stance Is it possible that we can create a compelling motivational story for the desire of the individual as such to work against the emergence of the good rather than for it. So let's take a look at what Genesis says about the creation of experience. So first of all, remember we're taking a phenomenological stance on this story, which is to say that this story is not an objective retelling of, of materialistic emergence. It's something more specifically dramatic. It describes the nature of human experience. Okay? The nature of conscious human experience. And in fact the creation story of Genesis lays explicit stress on individual consciousness literally as a precondition for being itself. Which is to say that underlying the story of Genesis is the notion that without whatever consciousness is, there would be no segregated entities and therefore no being. So this is one manner in which Genesis attempts to put human beings at the centre of the cosmos, so to speak, which is the idea that the world independently of consciousness, whatever that world is absolutely needs to be reflected by consciousness in order to exist in any sense that existence could reasonably be defined. First chapter: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form and void. And darkness was on the face of the deep." Now, the idea that the earth was without form and void takes us back to the 13:48:55 Mesopotamian creation myth and because the word for void, the Hebrew word for void is "Tehom". And "Tehom" is a word derived from Timat. And the void, the chaos that constitutes the unformed condition of the cosmos prior to the elaboration of being is assimilated to the same category as Timat, which is this terrible unformed and frightening aprioric condition that has to be courageously confronted in order to manifest itself as being. "And the earth was without form and void and darkness was on the face of the deep." So now you see another, another interplay of opposites here between matter and water, the primordial elements. So first of all it's heaven and earth. And then it's earth and water and, and the height and the deep. And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the water. So another opposite: that interaction between spirit and whatever it is that the precosmogonic water or chaos constitutes. "And God said let there be light. And there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good. And God divided the light from the darkness. " And then a prototypical division between light, which is associated with illumination and enlightenment and consciousness because we're conscious during the day. And the sun and life that emerges nested inside this, the initial opening lines of this sentence. Northrop Frye notes that there's tremendous emphasis on the notion of a repetitive cycling of days and nights in the opening sentences of Genesis, even though from a formal perspective this emphasis is paradoxical because the notion of the day emerges before the creation of the sun. And Fry's point is not that this is some careless gesture on the part of the people who authored Genesis. But more that it's an attempt to emphasize the idea of a cyclical relationship between consciousness and light and darkness and chaos and to highlight the idea that this cyclical relationship is somehow absolutely vital to being itself. So Genesis one five says "and God called the light day and the darkness he called night. And the evening and the morning were the first day " Frye says "... the central metaphor underlying beginning is not really birth at all. It is rather the moment of waking from sleep. When one world disappears, a world of virtuality and potential, and another comes into actual being. This is still contained within a cycle. We know that at the end of the day we shall return to the world of sleep..." and that's a notion that has a metaphorical resonance because there's the sleep that punctuates periods of consciousness. And then there's the great sleep at the end of life, which is characterized by the complete cessation of consciousness. We know that at the end of the day we shall return to the world of sleep. But in the meantime there's a sense of self-transcendence of a consciousness getting up from an unreal into a real or at least more real world. This sense of awakening into a greater degree of reality is expressed by Haraclitis as a passing from a world where everyone has his own logos, into a world where there's a common logos - experience that we all share. "Genesis presents the creation as a sudden coming into being of a world through articulate speech, which is another aspect of logos"logos incorporates the idea of creative exploration, And then the formulation of the consequences of that exploration in verbally communicable categories Right? Which give our, give our aspects of our being their defined boundaries and parameters and enable us to establish a shared mode of social being- through articulate speech conscious perception light and stability. Something like this metaphor of awakening may be the real reason for the emphasis on days and such recurring phrases. "And the evening and the morning were the first day", even before the day as we know it was established with the creating of the sun The most fundamental pair of conflicting and cyclically interacting pairs of opposites that is portrayed in Genesis is essentially the pairing of chaos versus order, chaos versus generative order. And a poem by F.I Tiuitchev expresses this idea extremely well and very powerfully. So I'm going to read it to you. When sacred night sweeps heavenward she takes the glad the winsome day. Unfolding it, rolls up it's golden carpet that had been spread over an abysmal pit. Gone vision like as the external world. And man a homeless orphan has to face in utter helplessness naked, alone the blackness of immeasurable space. Upon himself he has to lean with mind abolished, thought unfathered in the dim depths of his soul he sinks. For nothing comes from outside to support or limit him. All life and brightness seem an ancient dream while in the substance of the night unraveled, alien, he now perceives a faithful something that is his by right. Um, absolutely brilliant poetic statement, I think. Laying out very nicely, very richly the, the fundamental nature of the existential paradox that constitutes human life. Pointing to a very profound sense of futility and fear. But then beyond that to the notion that in the depths of the unknown, in the depths of the darkness and in the depths of all that, that's fundamentally unfaceable, there still lurks something that can be discovered given sufficient courage. Another fundamental division portrayed indirectly in Genesis, the word versus chaos. So what you have in genesis is an absolutely stellar idea. I think perhaps the most fundamental contribution of archaic Jewish thinking to western and world civilization, which is that although it is easier in some ways to consider the actual matrix of things, their material substrate as the strata from which they emerge, it is equally reasonable and perhaps more pragmatically useful to note that things only exist because of the interaction between the logos, the word that characterizes consciousness. And whatever this matrix is. So in Jewish thought and then Christian thought, and of course in thoughts of that sort echoed throughout the world, there's the idea that consciousness associated with the transcendent directly associated with the deity is actually the thing that in interaction with this matrix give, gives rise to being. Genesis plays a stress, places stress on this notion of the internal logos, the individual consciousness in two very complex ways. It first says that it's the word of God, the logos of God that gives, that gives order to chaos and makes being emerge. But then even more particularly it's the, it's the self-conscious logos of individual humans, their capacity not just to see the world as an object. But also to see themselves as an object that gives the world the particular value slant that it has for us. which is to say that not only are we in a world where the subject and the object are separated. And, and therefore experience and suffer the consequences of that separation-But even more particularly we are the only creatures who are so conscious that we can observe ourself as objects. And the consequence of that is that because we've extended our consciousness to ourself, we're capable of conceptualizing things that other creatures cannot conceptualize. Such as the infinite possibility that lays manifest of the unknown but also the fact that as individuals we're subject to our finite limitations, right? That we can become diseased. That we can become mentally ill. And that finally we'll die. And so the idea here is that something like the extension of logos to the object, to the subject has made human existence finally problematic. And genesis refers to this as essentially the heritable sin of Adam. Because we're aware of our own vulnerability as a genetic consequence merely of being human. There's a transformation in the nature of experience that has essentially cosmic significance. Lao Tzu in the Tao Te Ching makes a comment on the formless chaos that constitutes the matrix of things, the origin of things in the following manner. He says "there was something formless yet complete that existed before heaven and earth without sound, without substance. " This is the void or the chaos. "Dependent on nothing, unchanging all pervading. Unfailing. One may think of it as the mother of all things under heaven." The idea here being that whatever experience is in the absence of a delimited human consciousness, is something that's outside the boundaries of time. Because time -temporality is a human attribute. And it's outside the boundaries of spatial limitation because only human beings with their delimited and fixed size can attribute spatial aspects to being itself. So whatever it is, is that exists without us, is so comprehensive and so complete and transcends temporal dimensions to such a great degree that it can't be conceptualized as being at all. It's something that transcends being to such a degree that it's not even nameable but still exists as "the mother of all things under heaven". Now Genesis formally associates the human being with logos. And this is a determinative move in human history just as the Mesopotamians first hypothesized that their emperor was equivalent to Marduk, the force that confronted Timat and carved her into pieces and made the world, and just as the Egyptians conceptualized their pharaoh as the intermingling between Osiris, the stability of the state and Horus the exploratory hero. And then disseminated that identity down the aristocratic levels, closer and closer to the individual, individual. So the ancient Hebrews said, "and God said let us make man in our image after our likeness." Now, it could be said that the logical derivation of that statement is that god looks like human beings. Or conversely that God is an old man with a beard. But it means something I think that's more sophisticated than that. Which is that the central aspect that's associated with this transcendent deity, the logos, which is the thing that gives rise to order as a consequence of it's confrontation with chaos is also the thing that centrally characterizes human consciousness. And so with that there's this transcendent notion that inside each human being is a spark of genuine divinity. And it's the manifestation of that divinity in human temporal and spatial parameters that literally keeps the cosmos generating. "So God created his, man in his own image in the image of God created he, him. Male and female created he them and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and the fowl of the air and over the cattle and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. " Now fundamentalist Christians read this as an injunction, right? This is what human beings should do, dominate all other living things. But it's more like a description, which is that the consequence of the embeddedness of this spark of divinity in the individual is precisely what gave rise to the human ability to dominate the planet. Which is an ability that at least at the moment seems fundamentally unparalleled, with no limit in sight. So it's not an injunction so much as a cold-hearted description. There's a very profound idea underlying the necessity of the creation of the individual human being. Here's a line of archaic Jewish speculation that runs something like this: Why is the creation of a limited subject necessary if God's omniscient and omnipotent and omnipresent? Why would he bother creating anything outside of himself? And the line of speculation runs like this. The one thing that a being that is complete in all regards even all hypothetical regards lacks by necessity his limitation. And as a consequence of that anything that's absolute is not complete and can't be complete without limitation. And so there's an emergent idea in Genesis. And most notions of the emergence of human consciousness that the absolute needs the reflection point of a delimited being to actually spring into some kind of defined actuality. So that being itself becomes an interplay between the necessary limitations of the finite and the transcendent reality of the absolute. And so being is something that emerges because of the fact as another ancient Jewish tradition has it, God and man are in a sense twins, mutually dependent on one another for their defined being. From such a perspective, being has the same nature as a game. When you're playing a game you have to play by rules. Which means that there are things that you can do while playing the game. But there are many, many things you can't do. And that the game could not exist without the limitations. Also predicated on the idea that the imposition, the Nietzschian idea that the imposition of limitations on a structure actually gives rise to the possibility of diverse new forms. Which is also a very sophisticated way of conceptualizing the world. So from the perspective of Genesis, the individual is the locale of the experiential drama. And the fact that the individual is limited is a necessary precondition for being.
So let's take a look at the structure of paradise as it's presented in Genesis. So the first aspect of the initial paradaisal state is un-selfconsciousness. Now if you look and factor analytic studies of human personality you note that self-consciousness although it is arguably our greatest gift also loads almost entirely on the factor that defines negative affect. And you might also notice that when you say, I became self-conscious you generally put a negative cast on that in that I was talking before a group of people and suddenly I was seized by self-consciousness. And as a consequence of that I was flooded by negative emotion and was fundamentally immobilized. So it's a very paradoxical, a very paradoxical state of being, our highest rational gift say, and the only on that clearly distinguishes us from animals is also that which, when manifested, makes us almost unbearable anxious The initial paradaisal state when Adam and Eve first walked in the Garden of Eden is characterized by an animal-like unselfconsciousness. Adam and Eve, whatever they are, are not clearly segregated from the rest of the world. They have no idea, for example, of their own nakedness. And if you think about what nakedness means, you immediately understand that that's also a very profound, dramatic representation. You know with children around the age of 3 or 4, many of them regardless of their mode of upbringing, start to become very concerned about privacy, say with regard to bodily functions and also very concerned about ever showing themselves without clothing and it's perfectly reasonable to presume that that's a consequence of their emergent self-consciousness, an event that takes place somewhere between the ages of 2 and 5 and that's a defining moment that makes them segregatable, say from their mother. And so you also have images of Paradise that flow through Western history that are characterized by the image of the unconscious union between the mother and child which is an imagistic representation that eradicates the tension of self-consciousness both for the mother and for the child. So the notion that the child is living in a paradaisal condition that is somehow lost as he or she approaches adulthood gives another sort of symbolic layer to the notion of the pre-selfconscious paradise. It's also a place where order and chaos are in perfect balance and you know that because what paradise means is para - around, daisa - a wall, while Eden means delight or a place of delight. Paradaisa, paradise is a walled garden, a walled place of delight and a garden is precisely that place where the forces of nature or chaos and the forces of culture are held in perfect balance, right? That's what a garden is. It's nature given form by culture and it's a place that's archetypically pleasant a place where the intervention of human activity has produced a kind of stability that transcends that of nature because it's a cultural construct but also that transcends that of culture because all of the plants and the other growing things that constitute a garden are somehow transcendent even though they're under the cultivating hand of culture and the individual. If you look at the manner in which the fall story is represented, you can also see that the place of craziest stability can be regarded as a kind of paradise. So if you remember the story of Moses leading his people through the desert, it's clearly the case that when the Israelites were in the desert, even though they got away from the tyranny it was easy to look back and say well you know, tough as it was, the place that we were before was much better than the place we are now. So it's perfectly reasonable and expectable for people who are caught in a crisis to look back to the time prior to the dawn of that crisis with longing even if the crisis that they're presently experiencing is a necessary precondition for further development of personality. So the story that's laid out in Genesis has its structure something like this. Before we became self-conscious the world was perfect. As a consequence of the rise of self-consciousness we were thrown out of the Garden of Eden, out of paradise and destined to live the profane existence that characterizes our present mode of being where we're subject to knowledge of mortality and the possibility of Illness and alienation from God. And wouldn't it be ever so great if we could only return to that condition of unself-consciousness and make all our problems go away. And you see this kind of pathological paradaisal reminiscence manifesting itself in the most banal forms of conservatism which are always projecting the ideal - the ideal path somewhere back into the unattainable reaches of time. And also in those situations that obtain psychologically when people are absolutely possessed by depression and anxiety and wish for their consciousness to come to an end if not metaphorically so they desire to sleep, then actually so that suicide is viewed as a kind of unconsciousness whose paradaisal nature, the absence of all opposition, is viewed as clearly preferable to the difficulties of actually maintaining being. Eliade says, the idea of paradise once and then paradise lost is not something unique to Western or great Eastern societies. It's a widespread motif, just as wide as the flood motif. Regardless of where you go in the world you find this notion. "When heaven had been abruptly separated from the earth, that is when it had become remote as in our days, when the tree or vine connecting earth to heaven had been cut or the mountain which used to touch the sky had been flattened out then the paradaisal stage was over and man entered into his present fallen condition. In effect all myths of paradise show us primordial man enjoying a beatitude, a spontaneity and freedom which he has unfortunately lost in consequence of the fall. That is of what followed upon a mythical event that caused the rupture between heaven and earth." As I said, Eden is delight, a place of delight, by terminological definition whereas paradise is a walled garden. I want to show you what knowing that does for analysis of the relationship between eastern and western thought. So let me tell you quickly the story of the Buddha and I'm going to represent it fundamentally like this. Buddha starts his life in what's essentially a walled garden by all - by all reasonable comparative analysis. And as a consequence of his emergent self-consciousness, the unself-conscious child-like perfection of that early state is permanently disrupted so you have a situation where the greatest redemption story of the East follows precisely the same dramatical tract as the greatest creation story of the West. So this is the story. Buddha's father is visited by an angel who tells him that his son is going to grow up to be the greatest temporal profane ruler the world has ever seen or a great spiritual leader. And his father, being a pragmatic and conservative man, decides that there's no possible way I'm going to allow my son to take the ambivalent road of spiritual enlightenment. I'm going to allow him to fall completely in love with the world so that he will remain attached to this domain. So prior to Buddha's birth, his father constructed a great city with walls around it and inside that city he removes all signs of pain, frustration and disappointment, any sign of ugliness and age, the only people who are allowed to exist within this city, are those who are in perfect mental and physical health, who are paragons of beauty and virtue. And the idea that lurks behind that archetypal story is that when a father has a child his moral obligation is to shield the developing consciousness of that child from contact with any of the horrors of life that could provide the child with an experience too traumatic for that developing consciousness to apprehend. So because it's an archetypal story it relates to the development of all people, not just the redemptive saviour and that's the motif that the Buddhist story initially follows. A good father makes his father fall in love with life by enticing that child into a direct relationship with all that life has to offer. So Buddha grows up within this walled garden, this unselfconscious paradise. But precisely because he's being shielded to this degree and allowed to mature, his consciousness continues to expand and the world outside the boundaries that his parents have established for him starts to attract his attention. Now we know already that the forbidden fruit, right, the lure of what's outside the walls is something that human beings just can't keep their mangy little paws off, right? We are absolutely uncontrollably curious and the best way to make sure that we investigate something is to lay down a structure that says, whatever you do under whatever circumstances never look there, right? And then the automatic systems that underlie our orienting and that motivate our seeking experience are constantly pulling our attention precisely to that forbidden spot, compelling us to investigate exactly that which has been forbidden. So because Buddha is a consciousness developing in a healthy manner he immediately becomes curious about what lies beyond the limits that have been established with him and he makes a decision to go outside of paradise. right, which seems a particularly ridiculous thing to do, given that in principle he had everything he could possibly want inside the walls. But then again we have the troublesome notion of the original sin of Adam, right, which is that if any of you were offered a forbidden fruit again under circumstances mythologically equivalent to those that obtained in the beginning, you'd immediately reach your hand out and take it because what we haven't got for human beings is always far more compelling than what we have got So Buddha goes outside the walls. But his father, who's a good father although somewhat conservative, decides he's going to rig the game a little bit so he gets rid of everybody that's diseased or unhappy or uncomfortable or ugly or old or anything that could possibly disturb the Buddha. and he lines the streets with flower waving women and puts petals on the road and sends his son out in a gilded chariot. But the gods who are lurking around, right, the trouble making gods who represent chaos and disorder and the unknown decide to send in front of Buddha a sick man who hobbles unsteadily into view. and Buddha asks his retainer precisely what this phenomena represents and his retainer says, well you know, human beings like you since you're human are subject to the deterioration of these mere physical powers in an arbitrary way. And this man is one person who's been so afflicted. And so Buddha is completely disenchanted by his exploratory move out into the terrible unknown and runs back into the castle walls and shuts the door and is perfectly happy to think of nothing for months. But then as his anxiety habituates and his curiosity grows, he can't stand the notion of never going outside the walls again and outside he goes again. And this time after his father prepares the route ever so carefully the gods send inside an old man who hobbles into view. And Buddha look at him in shock and horror and says to his retainer, just precisely what's going on here? And his retainer says, well that's an old man. Everybody gets old and you're going to get old too and that's the way of all humanity. And that's the point at which Buddha's self-consciousness expands not to only include the possibility of degeneration but to include the temporal horizon that's characteristic of life. And he finds that so terribly shocking that he runs back into the castle and shuts the walls down and plays with his friends for another six months until his anxiety, or maybe a year, until his anxiety finally habituates and he goes out one final time. And this time the gods send a funeral parade for him and he sees his first dead body. And this such a terrible shock to him that he can't even go back to the castle. So his father prepares for him a great party in the woods near the castle full of nude dancing women who are perfectly willing to flaunt themselves and to offer themselves to him. But Buddha is so absolutely and catastrophically shocked by this notion of emergent death that he can't take any pleasure whatsoever in what's being offered to him and he leaves the kingdom once and for all. And you think, well that's exactly what happens to you when you grow up, right? If you're reasonably well socialized and properly looked after then your curiosity gets the better of you and you keep going out into the world until what your parents have established for you is no longer sufficient for you. And as a consequence of that movement out into the world, you find out all sorts of things characteristic of your own life that not only your parents can't precisely explain to you but even the broader formal structures of your culture have a very difficult time handling. And when you finally do encounter such realities and allow their effect on you to fully manifest itself well then you're finally independent and you no longer can return home. But from that point forward you're also burdened as Adam is burdened when he loses his paradaisal unself-consciousness with the full revelation of what it means to be limited and alive. So what happens to Buddha as a consequence of this revelation? He becomes an apprentice and the chronicles of the Buddha's adventure are careful to say that he becomes the world's most proficient practitioner of Samkhya, which was a philosophical precursor to yoga and then to yoga. So he masters all the positions and the asanas until he's disciplined physically to an almost unlimited degree. And then he decides that he'll adopt a stance of world renunciation which is also something he's remarkably good at. And he starves himself until the chroniclers say he resembles nothing so much as a pile of dust. And then, having exhausted all the disciplinary structures that his sophisticated culture has to offer him but still not precisely finding the answer that he's looking for, he retreats into the forest, place of the unknown, and sits himself at the base of a tree. Underneath the tree he's visited by visions and temptations. The first vision is an essentially erotic one. Life itself tempts him back out of his self-conscious state into the domain of pure physical pleasure, a perfectly reasonable temptation, right, and one that's powerful enough so that Hindu philosophers say as their churches and cathedrals are covered with erotic drawings, if you can't get past the erotic drawings into the church that's the domain that you should still inhabit, right. In the dawning phases of life at least till middle age that's the appropriate mode of being to be enticed and seduced by the physical pleasures that life has to offer. But in the final analysis those are not sufficient to solve the problem of emergent self-consciousness. And so the angel of death visits him and offers him the opportunity to exist permanently in a state of nirvana. A very, very interesting twist on the story because you have to wonder, given the association say between suicidelity and the notion of paradise that exists underneath that, if what Buddha isn't being offered by the angel of death is in fact death and the cessation of all the problems of being regardless he rejects that, attains enlightenment briefly and then decides to return to the world to share what he's discovered with all of suffering humanity. The idea being that the Buddha who is the awakened or enlightened one is capable of attaining a transcendent state but also knows fully that because human beings have a shared social aspect it is not possible for any one person to attain redemption until all people attain redemption, the reason being that it's very difficult to be transcendent and enlightened when you see someone who's sick lying in a ditch. So then we shift from that back to Genesis and the tempted fall of man and read the third chapter. And they were both naked, the man and his wife and were not ashamed. Well what does that mean? Well, Freud pointed out that one of human being's most common nightmares is to be stripped of clothing in front of a crowd. Now why would that be precisely? Well your naked self is the most vulnerable aspect of you, right? We're all clothed and for good reason. Partly that's protection from the terrible natural world, right? But it also offers us the possibility of placing a barrier between ourselves, our vulnerable selves and the searching and critical gaze of the community, right? Because not only are we vulnerable to the rigours of nature, we're also vulnerable to the depredations and criticisms of society. And the notion that a man and a woman could exist naked and not know it is a clear - is a clear finger pointing in the direction of a story that says these people were not conscious or if conscious they certainly were not self-conscious. And how does the story develop? "The serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman: yea, hath God said you shall not eat of every tree in the Garden. And the woman said unto the serpent, well we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the Garden but of the fruit of the tree which is in the centre of the Garden God has said you should not eat of it, neither shall you touch it lest ye die. And the serpent said to the woman: you won't die for God knows that in the day you eat thereof then your eyes shall be opened, right, a clear pointing to the notion of an awakening and an illumination-- And ye shall be like gods knowing good and evil," right, which attributes to humanity, a dawning sense of morality explicit morality, the faculty for comprehension that we do not share with any other animal. "And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was pleasant to the eyes and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat and gave also unto her husband with her and he did eat. " Women, trouble. What's the tree? Well we talked about this a little bit before. So you say, well if you look at the structure of experience from this particular perspective and you think about that in a horizontal plane, vertical plane, sorry, with the layers one on top of another, then you can imagine the tree as the thing that unites these three layers. The tree is the domain that unites chaos and order and the individual, the structure running up through the middle of it. And you see a representation of that interestingly enough, from Norse mythology. This is the Yggdrasill the axis mundi the tree of the gods, the tree that stands in the middle of the Norse paradise. And one of the things that's very interesting about this particular tree is that if you look at its roots the roots are covered with snakes and serpents and underneath the snakes and serpents is water. And so that you see that the tree that stands at the centre of the world is rooted in chaos fundamentally, is rooted in whatever it is that constitutes the pre-cosmogonic matrix of being. And then the central aspects of this domain are nicely laid out as the domain of territoriality, the ends of the borders that the individual understands and the habitual territory that he inhabits and then the tree in the centre represents whatever it is that's central to this - to our mode of being. And so let's take a look at that in some detail and flesh it out symbolically. We find Eliade is saying the tree that stands hypothetically at the centre of the world is precisely that structure that shamans climb when they make their transition from normal mode of earthly being into their transcendent mode of being. So Eliade says the symbolism of the ascension into heaven by means of a tree is clearly illustrated by the ceremony of initiation of a Buryat shaman. The candidate climbs up a post in the middle of his yurt, his tent, reaches the summit and goes out by the smoke hole. But we know that this opening made to let out the smoke is likened to the hole made by the pole star in the bulk of heaven. So you can imagine there's a conceptualization of the world as centred around a particular axis and that the tent is regarded as, at least transitorily as a symbolic equivalent of the cosmological structure. Among other peoples the tent hole is called the pillar of the sky and is compared to the pole star around which the world rotates, at least from the visual perspective and is named elsewhere the nail of the sky. Thus, the ritual post set up in the middle of the yurt is an image of the cosmic tree which is found at the centre of the world with the pole star shining directly above it. By ascending it, the candidate enters into heaven. That is why as soon as he comes out of the smoke hole of the tent he gives a loud cry invoking the help of the gods Up there he finds himself in their presence. The tree is an absolutely archaic symbol and it seems to me most likely that it represents the structure of the nervous system. I think a structure that's rooted not so much in the spinal, sensory motor structures but deeply in the autonomic structures, stretching down into the centre of the body and planting the mind firmly in its material substrate so that the autonomic system and its projections up into the amigdylla and limbic system and then up into the cortex constitute the interface between the spiritual domain that our psyche inhabits and the material domain that constitutes our body. The tree at the centre of our being. What does the tree do? Well it bears fruit. Well what sort of fruit? Well there are multiple medieval representations that are quite peculiar showing Christ, for example, as the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The fruit of the tree of life. And what does that mean? It means that conceptualizations like the hero are the products of whatever it is that this tree represents. The tree is something that produces fruit. Fruit is also something that can be ingested. And as Eric Newman points out wherever liquor, fruit, herbs, etc. appear as the vehicles of life and immortality, including the water and bread of life, the sacrament of the host and every form of food cult down to the present day we have an ancient mode of human expression before us. So imagine the idea of the - of the Piagetian idea of assimilation and then accommodation and then understand its assimilative, nutritive, underlying metaphorical nature. The idea being that there's a tight analogy between ingesting something material and undergoing a transformation of energy. Attendant upon that, right, which is what happens when you eat and ingesting a piece of information which offers you a new mode of doing things so you can say well people will trade work for information. They will trade food for information. There must be a kind of equivalence between work and information and food and information because otherwise the trade wouldn't make sense. And then you realize that if you're informed you can undertake transformations of yourself and the material world in a much more efficient manner because that's what being informed means. And that means that being informed, acquiring some information and eating something are all tied up in a complex way into the same metaphorical structure. Eat something forbidden, transform as a consequence. Conscious realization is acted out in the elementary scheme of nutritive assimilation and a ritual act of concrete eating is the first assimilation known to man. Conscious realization is acted out through ritual by an act of eating. Since the act of eating represents a very familiar example of assimilation. The assimilation and ingestion of the content, the eaten food, produces an inner change. Transformation of the body cell through food intake is the most elementary of animal changes experienced by man. How a weary, enfeebled and famished man can be turned into an alert, strong and satisfied being or a man perishing of thirst can be refreshed or even transformed by an intoxicating drink. This is and must remain a fundamental experience so long a man shall exist. Eric Newman's point being that our psychological experience of the capacity of psychological transformation through eating is a metaphor waiting to be applied to the equivalent experience that we obtain, the equivalent excitement and sense of transformative possibility that we acquire as a consequence of coming across some new and truly valuable piece of information. So you have the idea that the tree that stands at the centre of the world, the individual mode of being, is something that bears fruit. And the ingestion of that fruit, that idea say or that piece of information is something that can produce a permanent transformation.
We know that the snake is utilized conceptually and metaphorically as representation of transformation, right because the snake is something that can shed its skin and be reborn. We know that a snake is something that's innately attractive and terrifying to human beings and other primates so that if you come across a snake, you're likely to be at least startled, if not horrified by it but also attracted to it in a way that is underneath your voluntary consciousness, right, because snakes attract orienting reflexes and they activate the systems underneath your consciousness that actually govern the structure of that consciousness. We know that the snake can be well represented as well as internal chaos so imagine this. Imagine that it's not unreasonable for a self-conscious mind searching for a mode of self-representation to remark on the parallels between the structure of the snake and the spine and the brain given that a snake is essentially a spine with a brain and then imagine as well that the most archaic aspects of our nervous system, those that govern novelty and orienting and anxiety responses or in fact precisely those that were described by McLean as nested inside the reptilian brain and then imagine along with the Hindu Yogis that the purpose of Kundalini Yoga is to activate the circuitry that's associated with that snake so-to-speak, to produce a permanent state of alert wakefulness that's associated with consciousness. So imagine this. Imagine an animal like, like a zebra, grazing mindlessly in the herd with no consciousness whatsoever. And then imagine its relatively undeveloped cortical structures activated suddenly by the movement of a lion off in the perimeter. And then imagine for that brief moment, that that zebra's actually conscious, a state that requires a tremendous amount of energy and difficult to maintain, but because the threat and the uncertainty manifests itself within the Zebra's mode of consciousness it wakes momentarily. And then imagine that human beings are like that zebra, always. Because we've become so conscious, because we note that the unknown is around us all the time, even when we think we're safe, we're never safe. Imagine that the reason we're so conscious is because as a consequence of our discovery of the possibility of our own mortality, all this underlying circuitry that in other animals is only apparent when they're startled or afraid or interested or curious. In human beings it's on all the time and that's what makes us conscious and the reason for that is because we developed enough cortical elaboration to note that we're always threatened by everything that's around us. And then imagine that - well that's pretty awful isn't it? because it's at the basis of all our innate existential terror - but then imagine as well that without that terror pushing us forward and and our constant reference to the dangerous aspect of the unknown, we would have never been motivated to produce the kind of societies that we've produced which are essentially very remarkably elaborated devices that enable us to find some protection from that unknown and to manipulate it effectively. And then remembering that story, we'll return to Genesis. Jung says the snake was regarded by early Gnostic Christians as a kind of deity whose faculties were more developed and advanced than the original Deity that actually structured the world, the idea there being that the world initially was a pretty abysmal place. Everyone wasn't conscious. We all existed at the level of the animal and then the snake came along and said, "wake up, wake up". And the movement from that state of unselfconsciousness paradise to this profane state of awakening can be regarded not so much as a descent but as an ascent of sorts even though a painful one. And then you have Goethe's commentary from Mephistopheles, his representation of Satan and his capacity for temptation who says: "follow the adage of my cousin snake/ from Dreams of Godlike knowledge you will wake / to fear in which your very soul shall quake." A statement associateing the human tendency to attribute to all revolutionary sources of new information a kind of demonic being. And then you have the problem of the woman. Now we know that within the context of the Judeo-Christian tradition women have unduly suffered for their role in tempting humanity in the embodied form of Adam towards higher order self consciousness and then you think well, let's just take a look at how human beings and their mating relationships differ from those of other animals like chimpanzees to whom we are very closely genetically related. And if you look at the mating strategies of female chimpanzees you see that they really don't care who they sleep with, so to speak. Any old chimpanzee will do. Now, the less dominant male chimps tend to be chased away by the more dominant male chimps but if a female and less dominant chimp can get the hell away from the watchful gaze of the dominants already, they're perfectly happy to mate. Human females are not like that. They're selective maters. And there's a tremendous body of evolutionary psychological information that suggests that although both genders value intelligence and physical appearance, females value the ability to attain dominance hierarchy status in men far more than men admire the ability to attain dominant status in women. which is to say that men don't care what a woman has with regards to potential for attaining status, whereas with women it's one of the strong determinants of mating preference. So then let's say look we don't know why the hell our cortexes expanded so rapidly somewhere between five and three million years ago. Let's offer this as a hypothesis. The women started to get choosy and because they were so damned complicated the whole human species had to exaggerate its cortical growth prior to any even use for that cortical growth just so that the men had an even hand in the competition, right. So women put tremendous selection pressure on the human being to develop tremendous, tremendous cortical expansion. Now, we already know that from the mythological perspective that women are frequently cast into the same conceptual domain - the temptress domain - as the benevolent aspect of the unknown and we know as well from representations of hero mythology that it is the individual who goes out to confront chaos whose most likely to free from the dragon not only treasure but a virgin say in the case of mythological representations like say George and the Dragon. So then we close with the notion of voluntarism and in the Old Testament in Genesis, there's now there's this notion that not only did people become self-conscious because they did something but they did this voluntarily right? They they they made this decision on their own. So Milton puts words into God's mouth and says, "So will fall/ He and his faithless progeny: whose fault? / Whose but his own? / ingrate, he had of me/ All he could have; I made him just and right,/ sufficient to have stood, though free to fall." and then you think if you think well maybe the notion of the heritable sin of Adam characterizing human beings and their fallen existential condition isn't just the black-hearted ravings of fundamentalist southern Baptist lunatics. Right? There's something to this. Human beings are the only creatures that seem to live at odds with their own experience and it's not so unreasonable to suppose that it's our dawning capacity for self consciousness that put us in that uncomfortable position. So why do I associate the eating of the apple with self consciousness? Well, it's because that's how the story lays itself out. You have the collateral evidence of the Buddhist story of enlightenment, right? His contact with death. You have multiple medie, medieval representations of Eve offering to animal, to Adam not an apple but a skull. You have multiple representations of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil in the medieval iconography as not containing apples but containing skulls. And you have the the statements that are within the context of Genesis itself. "And the eyes of both of them were opened. And they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves aprons. Well, there's a lot of information packed into those two lines, right? What does it mean to have your eyes open? Well half your brain is visual cortex. it's not unreasonable to presume that that means that quick, a quick magnification of consciousness. You're conscious during the day. That's when your eyes are open. But what happens when your eyes are open? Well, you know you're naked. Well what does that mean? Well, you know you're vulnerable, right to social comment, to social judgment, to dominance, hierarchy, status manoeuvering and to all the terrible things that the unknown world can can heap upon you. And so then what do you do? Well you create culture. Right? And that's what this little sentence said. "And they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves aprons." That's a pretty eventful sequence all crammed up in two little sentences. So then what happens? Ah I think it's extremely interesting. So before Adam and Eve figure out that they're naked, they're cruising around the garden having a fine time doing whatever they want. They don't take any thought for the future, right? They don't have a pre frontal cortex. They're living in a, in a paradox-less environment like an animal lives. Well what happens after they become self conscious? Well, prior to this Adam's walking around with God right? And you think about what that means. Does it mean something like this? An animal isn't in the world of good and evil. An animal like Nietzsche points out is beyond good and evil, right? Enraptured in te, entirely by the actions of automatic instinct, governed by processes that are completely transcendent. The animal's nothing but a force of nature. There's no opposition between the animal and the world. The animal is the world. And just as in the case of the animal prior to the eating of the apple, Adam walks around the garden with God. There's no discontinuity between Him and the, and the transcendent world as such but as soon as he becomes naked, he hides. Well why? Well that doesn't need to be answered. All you have to do is think about it. Why would you hide if you know you're naked? Well, it's simple. You hide because you think you can get hurt. You think that whatever you are is so vulnerable that if it shows itself to the transcendent to others, to the natural road that something terrible will happen and then you think well that's a pretty logical pre-supposition right? Look at us. So God comes cruising around the garden after Adam and Eve eat the apple in the cool of the day, and Adam and Eve hide themselves among the trees of the garden. And God says, hey Adam hey, where are you? And Adam says, "I heard your voice and I was afraid because I was naked and I hid myself". And that story has bottomless depth because it means something like this. At the beginning of Genesis, there's this notion that there is a transcendent relationship between the individual and God, right? The identity of logos and the individual right? A notion by the way that our entire idea of intrinsic human right is predicated on as we've been at some pains to demonstrate. A relationship between the limited and the limitless eradicated by the dawn of self-consciousness. Well what does that mean? Well, let's say you have a destiny just for the sake of argument. Right? Because you are a being with a tremendous history and an unbelievable potential. So let's say you have a destiny, just for the sake of argument. What would cause you to hide from that destiny? Well, obviously your own reflection's on your mortal vulnerability, right? How could I be characterized by any transcendent power whatsoever when I'm susceptible to social alienation, right? When I have this body which is capable of terrifying degeneration that will eventually decay into old age and that is bounded by death. How could I be good for anything which is precisely what this little story says. And so God figures out that Adam and Eve at the fruit and that's pretty decisive move because once you wake up, sorry, you're awake. And he says, and this is not an injunction by the way. This is the description. All right, you've done it now. "And to the woman he says, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception. In sorry shalt thou bring forth children." Why? Why? Well, we have a big cortex, right? Really big. It grew fast and what that meant is that there was an evolutionary arms race between skull size, date of birth, and pelvic diameter girth. The wider the pelvis, the less effectively you can walk. The larger the skull, the bigger the brain. The younger the baby, the more dependent and vulnerable. So what do we have in the case of human beings? The female human pelvis has already stretched to the limits of its structural capacity. So the hole in its center is as big as it can get without compromising the structural integrity of the pelvis while still allowing women to walk and run. So how have babies adapted to that? Well that's simple. A mammal of our size should have a gestation period of two years. We have a gestation period of nine months. Why? You gotta get the damned baby out before its head gets too big. What does that mean? Well, means it's vulnerable, right? Nothing more vulnerable than a baby human being except maybe a baby kangaroo, right? But it's got a pouch to hide in at least. So we're born vulnerable, right? Characteristic of the birth of the hero. Who suffers in childbirth? Women. Why? Baby skulls just a little bit too big. Has to be crunched and compacted during birth, right? The skull bones aren't joined together so that the baby's head can be squashed and visibly deformed during the process of birth. Prior to the twentieth century, what was the death rate among women giving birth? One in three? One in five? Terrible. Why? That's the price you pay for self consciousness. "And thy desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over thee." This is not an injunction. This is a description. The additional burden that dependent offspring place on women, place them at a disadvantage. What's the consequence of that from a historical perspective? Well, any feminist can answer that question right. "And unto Adam, he said, because you listen to your wife, and have eaten the tree, of which I commanded thee saying don't eat that, cursed is the ground for thy sake. In sorrow shall thou eat of it for all the days of thy life." Fair enough, right? Once you're self-conscious you work. Why? Well animals don't work. Why do people work? Well, because we know, right? We know that if it isn't going to happen today, it's going to happen tomorrow. And if it isn't going to happen tomorrow, well it's going to happen next week or the week after or the month after the year after. And we bloody well better prepare. So that's what we do, constantly. Prepare and prepare and prepare. So we're not bounded and motivated by what's happening from second to second. Like the animal is in its still paradisal state. We're constantly tormented by an endless string of what if questions because when we look at the unknown, we can see the possibility for everything including our own punishment, our own torment, our own demise and so we're motivated like no other animal to work. And so we work. But that is another aspect that alienates from paradisal being. "Thorn and thistles shall it bring forth for thee and now shall eat the herb of the field, in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground, for dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return. Right. Therefore the Lord God sent Him forth from the Garden of Eden to till the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man and he placed to the east of the Garden of Eden cherubims and a flaming sword which turned every way to keep the way of the Tree of Life." Adam and Eve, right? The Mother and Father of all humanity. So you can give them a mythological slant and you can say Adam is culture, say and Eve is nature because they're the archetypal parents. It's a perfectly reasonable interpretation. They have twin sons, Cain and Abel. So let's read first born creatures, first born human creatures in the new self conscious world. So what are the first two individuals in the new self-conscious world like and let's find out. "And Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived and bearer of Cain and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord. And again she beared his brother Abel, the younger brother. And Abel was a keeper of sheep but Cain was a tiller of the ground. And in the process at time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord." Okay. So, we're going to remove this from its - this story - from its entrapment in a particular temporal domain and within a temporal culture. We're going to say something like this. Well, if you work you make sacrifices right? That's what work's all about. And the reason you make sacrifices is because you're offering up to the unknown the fruits of your labour in the hope that as a consequence of your diligent effort, you're going to be favoured, right because otherwise why work? The point of working is to transform the transcendent into something benevolent. So you work and you work and you work and you say, is that sufficient? And the answer you get from the transcendent is the answer. Now it's certainly true that lots of people work and it doesn't go all that well, right? They make sacrifices and they do what they think they have to do and their life is one string of catastrophes after another. All right? So we have this situation. "In the process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering." So what that means is that old Abel, working away, may have things that are going great for him right? Fortune smiles on him. He's doing wonderfully. He's got everything he needs. Well, okay and he's scrounging away in the ground and things aren't going as well for him at all, right? Plagues, locusts, you-name-it. Farm life isn't going well. So what happens? Well, "Cain was very wrath that his countenance fell." Well, precisely right? Because if you work diligently towards a certain end and you don't get there then your contenance fell, falls, right? You're angry, frustrated, disappointed, hurt, anxious, threatened, ashamed, guilty, the whole panoply of negative emotions. And that's fair enough because of course if you fail, that's what's going to be the consequence But then there's this little twist on it? Right? This specifically human twist that, that's like that kind of moral of the whole story. And so you find the Lord saying, "What, you know, what's up with you? Why are you so unhappy? If you just got your act together then you'd be accepted. If you really got your act together" which is a statement something like this, if you keep making sacrifices and the same terrible thing keeps happening, there's always the possibility that you're just actually not doing it the right way. And if you'd just get yourself straightened up, tapped together, right? And drop the preconceptions that you don't really need, and adjust your behaviour accordingly, then fortune would smile on you. And that's exactly what the Lord says to Cain, right? You don't walk around with such a crabby look on your face. If you did, well, you'll be accepted and if you don't do well, sin lies at the door. So what does that mean? Well, this is a deep motif in ancient Hebrew thinking. If the world isn't laying itself out in a manner that you find acceptable, you're faced with a tough choice. Either the world is a terrible place, bent on your destruction or you're doing something wrong. And it bloody well better be that you're doing something wrong because if the world is a terrible place bent on your destruction, you've got absolutely no hope. "And Cain talked with Abel his brother and it came to pass, when they were in the field that Cain rose up against Abel his brother and killed him. " So what does that mean? Well, it's pretty easy. It's simple. It means this. Well, say things aren't that well for you? And it's really not because life's unfair and everything's stacked against you. It's because you're kind of a arrogant, stubborn, quasi totalitarian, cowardly idiot. And as a consequence of that, the world is turning into something ressembling a wasteland around you. And you have this auction. Change. Or continue. Oh, you have another option. Man look around. There's all those people doing well. The world's a terrible place bent on my destruction. Couldn't it be just the most interesting thing if, as things are going to hell for me, I could take a long, just for the ride, some of those successful people who are successful just for unfair reasons. Anyways, right? Instead of using all that negative emotion as a cue that there's something about me that might need to be transformed, I can say well why not just eradicate the target of my resentment? Right? Not only because that sort of removes the problem of comparison but more profoundly - and I think sort of again - limitlessly, profoundly. Let's say you make the decision that the world's a terrible place and it's bent on your destruction. And then you think well what's the logical response to that? And then you think something like this. Goethe, Faust, Mephistopheles credo. "The spirit I that endlessly denies and rightly too for all that comes to birth is fit for overthrow as nothing worth. Wherefore the world were better sterilized thus all that's here is evil recognized is gain to me and downfall, ruin and sin, the very element I'd prosper in" And Goethe draws our attention to this credo, not once but twice in his writing of Faust and has Mephistopheles say right, once again "go on, to sheer nothing. Passed With null made one. / What matters our creative endless toil /when at a snatch oblivion ends the coil?/ It is by gone, how shall this riddle run? As good as if things never had begun yet circle back existence to possess. I'd rather have eternal emptiness. " And so then you think about Cain-like figures, like Stalin. And you think well what exactly was he motivated by? And on the one hand you think well, he was trying to extend his cultural - dominion, plagued by his own self-conscious nuroticism he wanted to extend the borders of his totalitarian certainty to every corner just to not be plagued by the unknown. and you think fair enough, we're all pretty nervous and a little stability is a pretty good thing. Why? Because they make a fundamental judgment, which is the judgement of Mephistopheles. Look: life is terrible. terrible. terrible. we're self conscious, we get sick, we go insane, we're going to die, children, innocent children suffer everywhere. how in the world is it right to let such a state continue? maybe it will be better, all things considered to just bring the whole thing to an end. and then you think again with Eliade that the reason human societies fall apart is two fold, one is that things go from bad to worse in their own accord right? thermodynamic reality. pure entropy. structured entities decay. but then there's a twist, structured entities constructed by humans are sped in their process of decay by the participants of the individuals within that society who have essentnially decided that the game is not worth the price and that under such conditions the only reasonable thing for a self conscious - painfully self conscious - individual to do is to work as hard as he or she possibly can to take the maximum amount of revenge on the conditions of existence and to ensure that the entire game folds up and that consciousness disapears and that being is eradicated.
As I've mentioned to you before each of the 3 aspects of experience so the things you know the things you don't know and the fact of yourself have a very ambivalent underlying structure both positive and negative so that the things you don't know are interesting and compelling in the sources of new information but also the source of the things that undermine you both physically and mentally And the things you know of course your culture disciplines you and shapes you into a full person but also at exactly the same time molds you and crushes you in a particular direction rather than any of the directions you might have gone in And then finally with regards to the individual we spent a substantial amount of time discussing the individual's capability capacity to make order out of chaos and sometimes to make chaos out of order in the service of a higher order And that's all to the good but just like culture and nature have their negative aspects so do the individual And I think personally this is where Christian mythology in particular comes into its own I think of all the major religions Christianity has the most thoroughly developed what you might describe as formal model of evil and that model isn't part of the canonical writings of Christianity say encapsulated in the Bible but part of cloud of sort of natural mythology and storytelling that surrounds the canonical writings so you could say that although Christainity and Buddhism have spent a substantial amount of time developing up a representation of the hero Christianity in particular has also spent a substantial amount of time developing a formal portrait of the figure that stands in opposition to the hero and I think the most appropriate term for that figure who takes multiple forms in mythology is the adversary because the adversarial spirit is a spirit that stands in opposition to everything Stands in opposition to nature stands in opposition to culture and most specifically stands in opposition to that aspect of the human being that's both exploratory and creative Now the last time we talked I had a chance to describe to you how the figures of the adversarial brothers emerged naturally at the end of genesis as a coda to the story right Adam and Eve develop self consciousness they develop knowledge of their own mortality and death and as the primordial parents of humanity their first children take the form of the hostile brothers which is to say that if you're the child of nature the child of culture this sort of ultimate parents then as an individual you take two forms a positive form and a negative form and the negative form is characterized in many ways by the kind of absolute hatred of the good hatred of the positive form and I think that you can't understand the full human propensity for evil without considering more than the territoriality more than the innate territoriality of human being so if you look at animals well animals are territorial and they fight to preserve their territory and it's a rational struggle they're fighting for resources and for a place that they can that they can operate and live in and reproduce in efficiently but human beings are substantively different from that in that their agonistic conflict their aggression often seems to be motivated by something more akin to the pure desire for destruction rather than for any rational end whatsoever And so from that perspective I would say as an example the fact that Hitler ended up committing suicide in a bunker beneath Germany's capital at the end of the second world war when Berlin was in flames when all of Germany was in flames and when his country was completely defeated after tens of millions of people had died in the conflict including of course the 7 million or so people that were killed in the Holocaust. the normal mode of interpretation of that would be what a terrible defeat for Hitler but an equally valid and I think um an equally valid prima facie argument and one I think that's actually more valid is that wasn't a defeat for Hitler at all it was precisely what he was aiming at right from the beginning because his mode of being was intensely adversarial And I would also say that it's certainly possible that the full nature of these motivations weren't even necessarily clear to him As they unfolded across time during the second world war no more than the full motivations of any human being are necessarily accessible to them as they act out whatever it is that they act out so Carl Jung says for example that we act out great mythological stories that doesn't necessarily mean you know the story just means you act it out so for example you see people whose lives are repetitive bouts of tragedy and what they're acting out is a tragic story and they know it insofar as they're actually acting it out but they don't necessarily have an explicit model of the relationship between their patterns of behaviour and the constantly tragic outcome they produce Well that doesn't even necessarily mean that what they're doing isn't voluntary Because things can be voluntary even if you don't understand them fully There's an aspect to the human psyche that's a "nest of vipers" so to speak because you can't necessarily trust what you see and that means not only when you're looking at someone else say but even when you're looking in the mirror you can't be sure that what you say you're doing is exactly what you're doing. Your motivations aren't transparent and they may not even be clear so I suppose the idea that lurks behind this formalization is that freedom of choice is such a good that one of its subsidiary necessities which is that there has to be a polar distinction between good and evil is worth having freedom is so important that it justifies the distinction between good and evil and I think that art I think that's a reasonable way to presume It's reasonable to presume that that's the manner in which experience is actually structured and there's complex reasons for that one would be that under the most optimal circumstances which is something we'll talk about as this proceeds to a close that means in a sense you can have your cake and eat it too Which means the potential existence of good and evil allows for freedom of choice And then if the choice is always towards the good then you have the benefits of freedom of choice plus the benefits of the good the only price you have to pay is the constant possibility of evil. It's very much like the structure of Christianity so you have the highest god who's whose highest son is Christ but you have the figure of the Satan lurking in the background who's also got a filial relationship with the highest god. and it makes for a confusing kind of theology because in many situations of course Christ is identified specifically with God the father but Satan always lurks in the background and his existential status is indeterminate because since God is everything then it's very difficult to make the case that the evil spirit isn't a derivative of God it's not easy thing to get straightened out rationally and I think Milton in Paradise Lost has a very good attempt good attempt to explain exactly what this might mean how there could be an overarching transcendent power And there could be two subordinate elements to that one evil and one good without destroying the idea that God as such is good and without eradicating the reality of evil a very very complex argument to make Now the notion of evil is also very very complex idea so if you look at arguments that support Atheism and I've mentioned some of these like Ivan's argument and the Brothers Karamazov where Ivan says well the world as such experience as such must be evil because it's predicated on the blood of innocence the suffering of children the fact that there's vast injustices in the world is indicative that there's no such thing as a good god or to speak in personified terms is evidence that the structure of experience as such is untenable morally it shouldn't be. Because it's predicated on suffering Jeffrey Burton Russell who's written whole series of books on the nature of evil makes a very clear distinction between different categories of terrible events that I think help bring this into clarity so imagine this imagine first that it's useful to make a distinction between tragedy and evil. Okay now tragedy is when the bad befalls the good an earthquake is tragic or disease is tragic. now it's easy to regard a disease or an earthquake as evil as well but the problem with that is there doesn't seem to be any motivation to it And so it's more likely it's more reasonable to think something like well people are vulnerable and have to be vulnerable in order to give existence a viewpoint one of the consequences of their vulnerability is that they're susceptible to tragedy Okay If their vulnerability is a precondition for being then the fact that they're susceptible to tragedy isn't necessarily an evil it's just a consequence of their limitation. Then you say well what constitutes evil if you can't put earthquakes and diseases and so forth into that category. Well then it seems to be something more dependent on choice which is the argument that Eliade is making Say the world does all sorts of terrible things to people but there are frequent - it's frequently the case that people act in such a way that make things worse rather than better. right so if you look at the consequences of the rise to power of the Nazis for example doesn't seem reasonable to put the Nazi concentration camp in the same category from an ethical perspective as the earthquake Because the earthquake is an emergent consequence of the rules that govern physical existence. Whereas the Nazi death camp is something that was planned it didn't have to be it seems to be an aspect of choice. And this seems to be the idea that's lurking underneath both this mythology and Eliade's comment on it it's the mere fact that the world is terrible does not mean that it's evil but then when you look at specifically human actions there's this aspect of twisted choice that Frye also makes much of He says if you look at the structure of human history and you try to explain why it has such a bloody and terrible course it doesn't seem sufficient just to attribute it say to the conditions of existence or to ignorance it seems more like there's a force behind it so to speak manifest say in every individual. But actually aiming at the suffering instead of just allowing it to happen or instead of not stepping in to stop it but actually aiming at it Now so let's take a look at the stories. And let's take a look at the leading figures so we know for example that the figure of Satan in Christianity is associated with a number of strange forms right the first association we know if is that he's associated with the... with the dragon and in the garden of Eden right so there's and so that there's a profound ambivalence in Christianity about the meaning of the opening act of Genesis because on the one hand you have when Adam and Eve are still profoundly unconscious they don't suffer But they're profoundly unconscious right they're not self conscious they're not aware of themselves so in many ways they're still animals So there's a Gnostic line of speculation. The Gnostics were a Christian sect that believed that redemption could at least partly be attained by understanding rather than just faith The Gnostics believed that the serpent that tempted Adam and Eve towards self consciousness was a more developed aspect of God than the God that had created Adam and Eve to begin with because the unconsciousness that characterized Adam and Eve was too underdeveloped to be perfect and so they had to be tempted forward into a more fully developed consciousness. and so although classical Christianity associated the serpent in the tree with Lucifer who's the bringer of light who's Satan the Gnostic thread of reasoning said well wait a minute it's not that simple because yeah self-consciousness makes you aware of death and vulnerability and knocks you out into the profane world but there's an aspect of it that looks like enlightenment - and you know this already in your own lives because often when you believe something and you're unconsciously convinced of the adequacy of that model and then you find that it's not sufficient right and so you crumble in disappointment you put your trust in someone and you find out say they're not worthy of that trust and that the evidence that enlightens you breaks that frame of reference and makes you collapse you think that's a terrible thing you can't help but feel that as a real betrayal and as an act even of evil but then a year later two years later you might look back and God you know I really needed that I really needed that lesson because as a consequence of learning that I'm much more mature and much more likely to establish stable relationships and so it's easy to see that from one perspective something can be terrible then from another it might not be terrible at all and even in classic Christianity you get this strange ambivalence about the events in Genesis that runs something like this Well yes it was an act of the most evil spirit the spirit of enlightenment the spirit of rationality the bringer of light Lucifer to knock Adam and Eve out of their transcendental unconsciousness and to start history it was an evil act but on the other hand it was also the pre-condition for the later emergence of Christ and as far as the Christians are concerned that's the greatest event in history so without this initial opening act this tragic opening act there'd be no reason the whole redemptive story and therefore considered from the perspective of the total story the opening tragedy cannot purely be considered evil Very very complicated line of reasoning Now the other thing you see here and I think this relates back to our initial map is and this also helps you understand the way people think now I said all ready that it's really easy to confuse tragedy and evil right okay so what that means is that it's real easy to confuse the negative aspect of the unknown with evil And likewise it's very easy to confuse the negative aspect of culture with evil your own culture the tyrannical aspect of it or the culture of other people So it's very easy, for example, for us to demonize the foreigner and that's basically because there's a part of our mind that presumes that all things that strike us negatively all things that produce negative emotion on our part like fear are the same thing So there's a blurry category of evil that's all terrible natural things all terrible social things and then whatever nastiness the individual can generate among themselves It's much more useful to draw a clear distinction between these different categories. beause that clarity of thought can help you focus in most specifically on those things that the individual is responsible for in terms of turning the world to waste so milton says this figure of satan lucifer the light bringer always associated with rationality Milton presents him as a remarkable creature right he's the highest angel in God's heavenly hierarchy he's Christ's brother in a similar mythological vein he's the most powerful angel that ever lived. So at least in the opening stages of this act Satan is presented as something absolutely remarkable Now the problem is here his very remarkableness starts to work against him And what happens is that as he grows in power and strength in this heavenly hierarchy he starts to become convinced that that omniscient himself whatever that transcendent figure is is unnecessary so the idea is that whatever Satan represents decides because of his own pride his own belief in his own sufficiency that the transcendent can be eradicated from consideration and the way Milton presents that as a revolution in heaven fundamentally. So imagine that the story is something like this. Well, George Kelly way back in like 1955 noted that what human beings like more than anything else really when they get right down to it is to be right Why? Well it's a pain to be wrong right because if you're wrong then whatever structure that you're using to conjure up the world has to dissolve but then you have to do a lot of really aggravating work exploratory work and creative work to put it back together And during the time before you put it back together then you're flooded with negative motivational states right you don't know which way is up Metaphorically speaking So we don't like to be you don't like not to be right and so what does that mean Well psychologists know that people have a very strong confirmatory bias which basically means that if you bring a frame of reference to bear on the world the probability is very high that you will look for confirming evidence and you discount disconfirming evidence Now the other thing that is characteristic of great figures of evil like Satan is the tendency to lie so Satan is prince of lie now what does that mean exactly? So, TS Eliot wrote this poem called the Cocktail Hour he talks about this woman who goes into a psychiatric treatment the woman says to the psychiatrist I'm telling you I really really hope there's something wrong with me Because I'm having a miserable time of it And as far as I can tell there's only two options here. Either I'm okay and I'm having a miserable time because the world is terrible which case nothing I can do about it or there's something wrong with me at some level of analysis that I don't really comprehend and although that's a painful option I'm really hoping it's true because if there's something wrong with me possibly I can fix it and if there's something wrong with the structure of the world well what's there to do about that Often what you see in psychotherapy is a battle between those two perspectives going on in the minds of the client that the client is in a situation where they're repetetively facing tragedy. they have a specific viewpoint about the world but the viewpoint might be well when it comes right down to it you really can't trust other people And they have all sorts of reasons for believing that they abused his children or they had a bad developmental history a number of relationships that hadn't gone well they have all the facts at their disposal to justify that particular perspective but the truth of the matter is that as long as they hold onto that belief and won't let it go and no wonder they won't they're gonna continue to suffer and part of what you always do to someone in therapy saying you know yeah you got a pretty coherent view of the world and all that and I can understand why you'd like to cram the whole world into that coherent perspective but the truth of the matter is as long as you hold onto that and won't sacrifice it won't go through this terrible period of dissolution it's always gonna produce this same tragic consequences so as long as you hold onto your belief rigidly everything around you is gonna go from bad to worse. Northrop Frye says with regards to such states that "a demonic fall as Milton presents it involves defiance of and rivalry with God rather than simple disobedience and hence the demonic society is a sustained and systematic parody of the divine one associated with devils or fallen angels because it seems far beyond normal human capacities in its powers We read of ascending and descending angels on Jacob's and Plato's ladders and similarly there seem to be demonic reinforcements in heathen life that account for the almost superhuman grandeur of the heathen empires especially just before they fall Two particularly notable passages in the Old Testament prophets linked to this theme are the denunciation of Babylon in Isaiah 14 and of Tyre in Ezekiel 28 Babylon is associated with Lucifer the morning star who said to himself 'I will be like the Most High'. okay so let's translate that into modern language and forget about Babylon let's take a Soviet Union for example Instead and let's say something like this "I will be like the most high" well first of all it's not difficult to read Stalin into that from a personal perspective but then it's more complicated than that because you can't blame the Soviet Union on Stalin When the wall fell down we know that one third of east Germans were KGB informers you can't blame that on Stalin you have to blame that on the one third of the east Germans who were KGB informers right it's this totalitarian presupposition presumption is distributed through the whole society there's a leader and a hierarchy and all that but they're not the people to be identified with the fact of the totalitarian state It's distributed through the whole society and it's precisely this it's what I don't know I don't need I don't need what I don't know one of the things I really liked about this sort of Christian metaphysical take on the problem of evil is that it... it adopts strange first principles like if you're an empirical scientist it's very difficult to come to terms with the notion of free choice Right because there are no deterministic models of free choice we don't know how that might occur although. if it seems to be a reasonable phenomenological observation that if there's anything true about existence about the facts of existence as it's subjectively construed the fact that you seem to have the faculty of choice seems paramount or primary now... one might say well that's just a delusion and we know that because our deterministic models have been so powerful Or one might say well alternatively we're going to presume the subjective experience to be true and saying well our deterministic models just aren't sophisticated enough and there's no real reason to choose between either of those on a name a priori basis right they're perhaps equally plausible And we also might note the deterministic perspective of course that if you go down far enough in your analysis of physical structures down to the quantum level say then deterministic models don't hold at all So determinism have its limits at the lower end or higher resolution end of physical inquiry I have no idea what that might mean for free choice It just means that our level of analysis that deterministic models do not describe Christianity takes the stance that the subjective the subjective sense of freedom is accurate And then tries to build the world from that point It presumes that's in axiomatic principle and so you have God in Milton's Paradise Lost saying with regards both to Lucifer and to human beings who are fallen he says "some will fall he and his faithless progeny speaking of human beings whose fault whose but his own ingrate he had of me all he could've I made him just and right sufficient to have stood though free to fall " I like that I think that makes a fair bit of sense to me I started to understand this most particularly as a consequence of reading Carl Jung because Jung has this really interesting notion and I think it's tied to the idea in Genesis that as soon as Adam becomes self conscious he hides from God So what if it was this and you can take an evolutionary tack on this too What if it was this what if it was the case that if you never turned away from any phenomenological evidence then you build a personality that would be strong enough to withstand tragedy What if that was the case So the idea here being let's say you are the person who notes that his or her friends don't exactly trust me, What do you do? Well to hide away you just walk away and then of course you never learn anything But let's say by contrast you say well no the first time you get any evidence that you're not 100% trusted you say look I got this pang in my heart saying the communication between you and I is not exactly straight Now something's going on here either you haven't got your frame of reference with regards to me right or there's something wrong with the way I'm looking at the world Those are the options so let's have it out You got this attitude and it's doing it's hurting me Tell me what you have to say and I'll tell you what I have to say and we'll exchange this pattern of information and as a consequence we're both gonna walk away a little bit more well put together God says yeah yeah people get disturbed and twisted and bent and warped but that's their own problem fundamentally because they have this capacity just to turn away. And as they turn away they get weaker and as they get weaker the world gets worse around them because they can't deal with it and they keep making mistakes and that's a terrible consequence and all that but if they just wouldn't turn away to begin with then there'd be no problem And there wouldn't be no problem because the world would stop being tragic because the world's tragic right I mean there you are little and vulnerable and you know things can roll right over you the world can demolish you but the idea would be instead that you could handle it without becoming corrupted and that would be sufficient so the idea would be it's a tough situation all things considered but it's also an interesting and compelling and beautiful one and it maybe that if you didn't turn away the interesting and beautiful and compelling aspect would overwhelm the tragic aspect and that would be fine.
Nietzsche talking about the European state of mind at the end of the 19th century, so Nietzsche says: well, we're in this terrible situation, right? God is dead, we've killed him, what does that mean? Well, we've taken our evolved metaphysics which structures our moral viewpoint and undermined it by rational criticism - peculiar move philosophically because it was never established on rational grounds anyways. We've undermined it rationally and replaced it with, well, nothing, nothing. What's the consequence of that? Well, he outlines that here. "Of what is great, one must either be silent or speak with greatness." And you can think about this as a prophesy on the events of World War I and World War II and the Gulag archipelago and the 60 million people dead in the Soviet Union and the whole unfolding of 20th century history and the great ideological battles that characterized that unfolding. So this is something Nietzsche sees coming and knows why. He says: "of what is great, one must either be silent or speak with greatness. With greatness. That means cynically and with innocence. What I relate of the history of the next two centuries, I describe what is coming, what can no longer come differently. The advent of nihilism, right, the belief in nothing. Our whole European culture is moving for some time now with a tortured tension that's growing from decade to decade as towards a catastrophe, restlessly, violently, headlong like a river that wants to reach the end that no longer reflects. It's afraid to reflect. He that speaks here has conversely done nothing so far but to reflect as a philosopher and solitary by instinct who has found his advantage in standing aside outside. " Why does the advent of nihilism become necessary? Well, because the values we've had hitherto thus draw their final consequence because nihilism represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and ideals because we must experience nihilism before we can find out what value these values really have. We require at some time new values. Nihilism stands at the door whence comes this uncanniest of all guests. Nihilism, right? Your beliefs are undermined once, what's the consequence of that? Well, one consequence is the belief is undermined. The other consequence is more metaphysical, which is: fooled once, you no longer have the belief. But maybe it's even worse than that because human beings can generalize. Fooled once, you never have any, you no longer have any belief in beliefs, which means you say something like this: I don't care what you think, doesn't matter what you think, the world is such a terrible place that no interpretation whatsoever can possibly suffice. That's nihilism. No meaning system whatsoever can possibly suffice. Well, what's the flaw? Well, the flaw is: well of course no system of coherent belief can suffice because most of the world's transcendent. You can't encapsulate everything that is, in your sphere of belief and what you might say then is that if you ever believe that what you believe is what should support you, the facts you know say, or the interpretation you place on the world, then your faith is badly misplaced. You don't believe in what you believe, you believe in something that's deeper than that And so then you see what's wrong with Tolstoy, right, and Tolstoy's story and Tolstoy says, accounting for his collapse in the stability of Christian belief, he said: this all happened, this collapse of my belief, when I was not yet 50 years old. I should have been considered a completely happy man. I had a good, loving, beloved wife, fine children and a large estate growing and expanding without any effort on my part. I was respected by friends and acquaintances, praised by strangers and could claim a certain renown. I was not physically nor mentally unhealthy. On the contrary, I enjoyed a physical and mental vigour I had rarely encountered among others my age. I could keep up with the peasants working in the fields and work eight and ten hours at a stretch without suffering any after-effects from the strain. And in such a state of affairs, I came to a point where I could not live and even though I feared death, I had to employ ruses against myself to keep from committing suicide. It was as though I had lived a little, wandered a little until I came to a precipice and I clearly saw that there was nothing ahead except ruin. And there was no stopping or turning back, no closing my eyes so that I would not see that there was nothing ahead except the deception of life and of happiness and of the reality of suffering and death, of complete annihilation. I grew sick of life. Some irresistible force was leading me to somehow get rid of it. this thought was such a temptation that I had to use cunning against myself in order not to go through with it. And there I was, a fortunate man carrying a rope from my room where I was alone every night as I undressed so that I would not hang myself from the beam between the closets. And I quit going hunting with a gun so that I would not be too easily tempted to rid myself of life. I myself did not know what I wanted, was afraid of life. I struggled to get rid of it yet I hoped for something from it. My position was terrible. I knew that I could find nothing in the way of rational knowledge except a denial of life and in faith I could find nothing except a denial of reason. And for me this was even more impossible than a denial of life. according to rational knowledge, it followed that life is evil and people know it. I described my spiritual condition to myself in this way: my life is some kind of stupid and evil practical joke that someone is playing on me. In spite of the fact that I did not acknowledge the existence of any someone who might have created me, the notion that someone brought me into the world as a stupid and evil joke seemed to be the most natural way to describe my condition. I could not be deceived. All is vanity, happy is he who's never been born, death is better than life, we must rid ourselves of life. Having realized all the stupidity of the joke that is being played on us, and seeing that the blessings of the dead are greater than those of the living and that it's better not to exist, the strong act and put an end to this stupid joke and they use any means of doing it - a rope around the neck, water, a knife in the heart or a train. Now the interesting thing about this, I think, is first of all, a Russian wrote it; and second of all, it was written in the late 1900s. And even more particularly is that you note that when the strong act, using a rope around the neck, water, a knife in the heart and a train, well, Tolstoy's talking about suicide. There's no necessary reason to presume that this should only be violence engendered against the self, right? If life is a stupid and evil joke, then what's stopping you from benevolently putting an end to the suffering of others, right? Benevolently in theory at least. Well, you know that's one perspective, right, but then there's always the perspective of the lady who went to see the psychiatrist in T.S. Eliot's poem, which is: well, if when your eyes are open life appears as nothing but suffering and pain to you, it could be that that is how life is. But it could also be that there's something wrong with the way that you're looking at the world. And in some ways, that's a much more humble perspective, right, because the alternative is: well, I know what's going on and I just look out there and there's the world and I've pretty much got it, like I know what it means and what it means is pointless suffering and pain and that's my model and I don't see any reason to question it. But then the alternative is: well, wait a second, there's always the possibility that I don't know absolutely everything and this final and horrible judgment that I'm placing on the conditions of existence could conceivably be misplaced, given the sort of presumptuousness of the claim, right? I'm in a position to render final judgment on the moral value of existence as such. It seems to me reasonable to presume that that's not the kind of statement that you should easily make And I remember when George Bush launched his most recent war, the initial terminology, I think this was for the Afghanistan battle, was: Operation Infinite Justice. But he retracted that phrase after a number of religious leaders objected to its kind of presumptuousness - which I thought was quite reasonable because infinite justice is something that most people should probably not hope for, right, because you never know precisely what infinite justice means because it might just mean that every bloody mistake you've ever made, you're going to pay for. And I suppose that would be just as applicable to George W. Bush as it would to anybody else And then Milton again describes the development of this adversarial spirit. He says: first, pride, pride and worse, ambition, threw me down. That's Satan's lament when he's in hell. And Milton's description of hell is extremely interesting. He said: the reason that hell is characterized by its structure is not so much because of its nature precisely, it's because of its distance from the good. So the farther you are away, say, from what constitutes the good, the more suffering is endemic to that state. So it's the distance away from something that constitutes the suffering. And then Milton says: it's very interesting to do an analysis of Satan's character and the notion of hell per se because how in the world can you reconcile the idea of a good God with the notion of this continual suffering? Milton says: well, Satan can step out of hell in one moment, all he has to do is admit that he was wrong. And that's the one thing that he will not do under any circumstances whatsoever So then we put one more twist on the story and we say something like this: OK, we already know that part of the reason that people have belief systems is so that they can structure their interactions with the world. It's a tool box, say. We're playing a game, we share the rules, that's fine, we can cooperate with one another. It could be other than it is but it's the way it is and it works for us, that's fine. There's nothing absolute about it except that a structure like that is necessary. Now whenever there's a threat to that shared view of the world, well then we're afraid and for good reason and it's not surprising under those circumstances that we fight to defend what we've made ours. But then you say, say you adopt this perspective, right, and it's this vengeful desire to destroy that extends beyond other individuals and beyond society even to the structure of experience as such. And then you think: well, what's the best mask for that and how do these two processes sort of interact? And you think: well, the most efficient way to do terrible things is to mask them with the highest order of morality and that's precisely what the totalitarian does. So that way, he gets to have his cake and eat it too. He's perfectly well protected from apprehension of the world because his belief system is complete, plus his underground motivations, which is this constant desire for revenge, can find their expression within the totalitarian structure and remain invisible even to himself. So he can say to himself: well, the reason I threw all those farmers out of their house in 1920 and stole their soup and their food and their grandmother's blankets and everything they'd worked to own was because I was building a socialist paradise, right? And it was a good thing for me to go into that house and not a bad thing. And as long as he believes that, or acts as if he believes that, then he can look in the mirror without screaming and there's no recognition whatsoever of precisely the sort of game that he's involved in, so he has it both ways, right? He can do everything terrible that he always dreams of doing and consider himself not only good but good even at a higher level than the people that he was actually afflicting. And of course, that's just standard description of what happened in the Soviet Union. Nietzsche says, I love this, his definition of morality, it's the most cynical thing Nietzsche ever said, I think: "the idiosyncrasy of decadence with the ulterior motive of revenging oneself against life successfully. I attach value to this definition." He said: well, why be an ideologue? Well, it's a good way to simplify the world, right? It's a procrustean bed, you just chop off everything that doesn't fit, then you don't have to think, right? So that's good because thinking is difficult and it's troublesome and it takes courage and so forth to transform chaos into order is no trivial matter. And if it's all ordered for you, well then there's really nothing left for you to do. But then Nietzsche goes even below that. He says: yeah, well there's more to the story than that, isn't there? It's like once you got this little procrustean bed all arranged for your enemies, then you can allow your most base, vengeful instincts full flow by just continually chopping people so they fit. And you do it, all the while saying: well, it's obviously the best thing that could possibly be done. And so then you look at Stalin, say, because not everybody who's adopted a vengeful tack on existence is sort of like the archetype of vengefulness or adversarial spirit. But you get now and then the people like Stalin, who are good counter-examples, say, to the people like Gandhi. And so Stalin's very instructive and so we could start by looking at what he did in the Ukraine. So at the end of 1929, the Kremlin decreed that millions of peasants from individually owned farms would be forced into agricultural collectives or kolkhozes seen in the eyes of the politburo as pliant providers of Soviet agricultural needs. In defiance of the facts, Soviet ideologists hammered out an appropriate Marxist terminology to explain what was going on. Throughout grain-producing areas, it was said: resistance to this scientific scheme was being organized by so-called rich peasants or Gulaks. With his customary brutality, therefore, Stalin decreed the liquidation of the kulaks as a class Well, Stalin liked this idea of like group guilt, that was a major theme for Stalin. That meant I really didn't have to pay attention to you as an individual. I could just decide if you were a doctor or engineer or a kulak or a German or whatever ethnic, racial or educational division happened to characterize a particular target at the time. And it didn't matter if you were guilty as an individual. That whole notion never even obtained. It was class guilt that mattered and if you were in one of those classes, well we're better without you. And of course, the nature of the class just changed constantly. But it was a perfectly logical thing to think if you believed in like historical determinism. If your parents were rich bourgeois, what was the probability that you're going to be a useful part of the workers' collective? It would be easier just to get rid of you ahead of time so you didn't cause too much trouble. So then you think about these kulaks, rich peasants, well who were these people? Like when we get down to the individual level? So you go in a village, the village was full of serfs, like not 40 years before, so these are people just struggling out of the feudal society, right? And you got some people in there who've managed to be successful enough as farmers, which is no easy thing, to like have a house and maybe hire one person. And you know maybe have a little extra food in the larder and a few kind of material possessions. So these are successful people and so you could say: well, they're the ones that actually knew how to farm. That's one theory. Or you could say: the reason they had all this stuff was because they stole it from all the other people, right? And then you think: OK, so I march into town, I'm a Soviet revolutionary and I say: hey, guys, you know those rich people, they stole everything they have from you. And then you think: OK, which of you guys is going to listen to that? Well, it's not going to be the sort of struggling people just underneath them, who are really trying to get ahead, right, because that's where they're hoping to get. It's going to be the resentful and revengeful few who think: well, the world's fundamentally unfair and it's obvious that those sons of bitches got what they want from stealing it form me and here it turns out that if I just go down the street and steal it back, well, not only am I allowed to do that but, according to this new emergent ideology, man, that's the best thing I could possibly do. So then multiply that story by several million participants and you have like the first five years of the Soviet empire. And so what do we have there? The result was a catastrophic onslaught on millions of peasant households. At first, party activists and local officials, read bullies, right, brutalized peasants, forcing them to surrender their homesteads and their possessions. Deportations, arrests and killings soon followed as terror generalized. The violence mounted to full-scale rebellion in various places, with regular troops engaged for months. For example, suppressing peasant uprisings. Resistance took various forms, usually reflecting the hopeless, desperate anguish of a doomed population. In the Ukraine, there were even women's rebellions, spontaneous uprisings of peasant women who attacked the local Kolkhozes to demand the return of confiscated farm products. With a colossal impact on the Soviet economy, peasants slaughtered their animals by the millions rather than see them seized. For two years, the fighting raged. As the dreadful process of de-kulakization continued, Stalin ordered a further assault on the recalcitrant peasantry. What Conquest calls the terror-famine of 1932. Moscow, writes Conquest, it's from a book called The Harvest of Sorrow, knowingly decreed grain procurements from the Ukraine and elsewhere exceeding by far what the local population could produce, right, which meant that everyone who lived there was forced and ordered to deliver more grain than they had ever grown. Communist brigades roamed the countryside forcing agriculturalists to disgorge the little they had been able to produce under conditions of severe dislocation. Grain sat unused in state reserves while the local population starved. This is from Wisdom, apocryphal Biblical writings: for the reasoned unsoundly saying to themselves: short and sorrowful is our life and there is no remedy when a man comes to his end and no one has been known to return from Hades. Because we were born by mere chance and hereafter we shall be as though we had never been because the breath in our nostrils is smoke and reason a spark kindled by the beating of our hearts. When it is extinguished, the body will turn to ashes and the spirit will dissolve like empty air. Our name will be forgotten in time and no one will remember our works. Our life will pass away like the traces of a cloud and be scattered like mist that is chased by the rays of the sun and overcome by its heat. For our allotted time is the passing of a shadow and there's no return from our death because it is sealed up and no one turns back. So a piece of writing thousands of years old and so Nietzsche says at the end of the 1900s: well, rationality undermines our faith in religion. But we have a piece of writing from more than 2,000 years ago that says: look, what is it about being alive? It's short and there's nothing to it, right? Our thoughts are biologically produced and when we die there's nothing left. Well, that's a very modern thought yet it was expressed thousands of years ago so you know, I think, merely from observing that that the crisis of faith that characterizes modern society is a reflection of the permanent crisis of faith that characterizes human beings. and you say: well, what's happening with the totalitarian? Well, the totalitarian is afraid of the unknown, for good reason, I mean and he's very interested in sustaining his own belief structure. And the combination of those two things, it can start off trivially is that the more you're convinced that you have to maintain the stability of your current belief structure, the more afraid you are of anything that's unknown. And the more afraid you are of anything that's unknown, the less likely you are to go out and explore. Then the less likely you are to go out and explore, the weaker you get because you stop gather information. And then the weaker you get, the more necessary it is that you have to have this frame of reference and it has to remain intact. And this sort of thing starts to cycle and cycle. So you undermine your own sense of your own autonomy and ability and you make yourself more and more a rigid tool of the propagandistic system. And you more and more adopt a sense of enmity towards anything you don't understand. And that's a spiral that goes rapidly down hill, right, rapidly into a state that's characterized by complete internal chaos And I think that's a good definition of what is meant in metaphysical language by hell, right? Hell is a bottomless pit. Why? Well, I don't care how bad things are for you or around you, there's always some bloody thing you could do to make it worse, right? There's always some suffering you can extend to others, there's always some bit of stubbornness or rejection that you can pull off that will make your already terrible situation worse, right? So there's no bottom and that seems to me to be right. If you do just a cursory historical analysis, no matter what terrible account you can come across with regards to, say, concentration camp brutality, in some other book there's some worse story. Like limited only by the absolute ends of the most brutal form of imagination, all a consequence, I think, of this process, right? And you can't really say what causes it because on the one hand, there's cowardice and lack of faith, right? Anything I don't understand - cowardice, pride and lack of faith. Anything I don't understand doesn't exist, plus I'm not the person to confront it anyways, right? That's the lack of faith. Each of those things feeds into the other and it's very difficult to say where it starts. And the thing that's kind of interesting about these self-referential processes is that they don't have to start dramatically. Like the loop can start very, very small and it picks up speed very, very rapidly. So you imagine you're speaking into a tape recorder and the speaker's on. You get too close to the speaker with the microphone and you get some feedback. And if you bring the microphone a little closer, the feedback develops more and more intensely. It can blow up the whole system. It doesn't have to start dramatically to move forward very, very rapidly. And what that means, at least in principle, is that even small mistakes anywhere along this circle can start the development of precisely this kind of spiral. And so you say: well, people, do people need to be abused to become totalitarian? Well, and the answer to that is no because everyone's been abused sufficiently by some occurrences in their life to justify taking a negative tack on the nature of experience. You say: well, how cowardly do you have to be in order to run away from things? And you think: well, not that cowardly because under most circumstances your life is characterized by sins of omission, right? It's there are things you left undone and like just exactly how rigid do you want your belief systems to be? And you say: well, I like them to be stable because without that stability, then I'm terrified. And then you can say: well, fair enough but that's all a sign of a kind of existential weakness. And then if social circumstances come around and give your life a good tweak, say like they did with the Germans prior to World War II, you just never know what side you're going to end up on. And so all these little tiny mistakes you know, mistakes that I think are marked by your own conscience, are precisely that, leads you down this terrible path. And if you think: well, no, that can't be right - well, then you have to remember that in these processes, say, of de-kulakization and the immense wave of death that characterized the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, most people were involved. And if they weren't involved in direct acts of commission, they were absolutely involved in direct acts of omission, right? They knew but they didn't say anything. Well, classically sins of commission are regarded as much more evil, say, than sins of omission. But I actually think that's backwards. The sins of omission are worse because every time you walk away, I mean what do you do? You walk away from a Nazi, what are you walking away from? Well, we know what you're walking away from, right? If you're walking away from a domain that's likely to expand into something that's completely undifferentiable from hell, and it's no wonder you walk away from that, but the fact that you walk away from it makes it much more likely that it's going to happen So then I think, to end this, something like this. We look for economic reasons to explain great terrible acts, right? We look for social reasons, we look for political reasons but we have Nietzsche's observation, which is something like this: I don't care whether or not your life's been characterized by suffering and deprivation. The mere fact of suffering and deprivation does not allow you to draw a particular conclusion. You can't say that there's a causal path between economic deprivation, say, and the rise of a totalitarian state because any event is susceptible to multiple interpretations. Well, how do these states come about? Well, I think: well, we look for political and economic and social reasons because that's the easiest place top look, right? If you ratchet up the level of description to social forces that are beyond your control, then you never have to worry about what it is that you're doing or not doing that's actually causing this sort of thing. But I think if you look at the historical record, especially if you look at it from a mythological perspective, the story is basically clear and it goes something like this: Every time you make a mistake that you know is a mistake and you don't fix it, the world moves more towards that. And it might be trivial, maybe, but it might not be. So you look at Adolf Eichmann, for example, and he's a little bureaucrat who planned the Final Solution and you find out he's just a little ratty guy, right? You see him in a bar, you don't even notice him, he's a negligible nobody. But he's the guy who planned the Final Solution. He was a normal person, I mean maybe even slightly less than normal, right? He is no monster, he wasn't the sort of person you'd remark on if you saw him. Precisely the opposite: invisible, quiet, unassuming, presuming no doubt, at least until he was arrested, that he was just doing what he was told and that was just fine.
There's this piece from search for the Holy Grail. And the Holy Grail is a myth that was constructed in England. And-And the myth goes something like this: There is a-- There is a cup, the Grail, used to hold Christ's blood. And that cup has a-- has redemptive significance and it's been lost. And the knights - King Arthur's knights - who go off to look for the Holy Grail are after this cup. So, it's a redemption story, right? It means, the world's damned, unredeemed. There's some object that can serve as, as the source of redemption - the source of nourishment, say, thinking about it from a symbolic perspective - and it's worthwhile to go on a quest of that sort. And the King Arthur story is set up in an interesting way, 'cause there's a king, Arthur, but he has all these knights, these nobles, and they all sit at a round table. And they're at a round table because they're equals. So, although it's a hierarchical story, there's-there's a motif in it that transcends the hierarchy. It says: Well... yeah, under normal circumstances everyone's arranged in a hierarchy. But when you're out to seek whatever you need, then everyone's an equal. And so, fine, so they sit at the round table, and then they go off to search for the Holy Grail And the story opens with a very interesting motif, which is the knights look at the forest and then they try to find the part that looks the darkest, to them. And then, they go that way. That's the marker for their mission, right, to go to the darkest place. And of course, each knight goes off in a different direction because the world looks slightly different to each knight. So... objectively speaking, they're going to a different place. But psychologically speaking, they are going to the same place, right? And that place, I suppose, is being represented in mythology and literature as "The Heart of Darkness". And if you were ever curious about why people aren't enlightened - since it seems to be a possibility - you can always think about the story of King Arthur and the knights of the Holy Grail, and think: Well, do you really want to enter the forest at the darkest place? And the answer to that is of course: No, because the darkest place means precisely that place you least want to go. And it's the same for everyone So then, I have this little nephew, although he's almost 15 now. He had this dream when he was four years old. And the background to the dream is this: He was waking up in the middle of the night for months, screaming. He had night terrors. And this went on for like six months. And what was happening in his life was twofold: There was some instability in his family, 'cause his parents got divorced about a year after that. And also, he was at the transition point from staying at home to going to kindergarten. So, you know, not only was he making the big move out there into the terrible world, but the stable point from which he might like to have moved was shaky. So, you know, he wasn't having that great a time. so anyways he's screaming away at night, and this is pretty unsettling, right, 'cause night terrors are no joke, and so he's upset about it, and his mom's upset about it, and so I'm watching him and he's running around the house; he's only about this high, a very verbal kid, and he's got this knight hat on, and this sword and this shield, and he's running around the house being a knight, and at night he takes his night hat and his shield and his sword to bed, and I think, we'll that's pretty cool, and you can see how that makes sense, right, and you can see how it's an enacted reality 'cause children enact or act out their reality before they can explicitly understand it, just like we do, and so I'm staying there, he wakes up, and he has, you know, one of these fits, and then the next morning he comes to breakfast, and I said, hey, did you have any dreams last night, and he goes, yeah, I had a dream; I said, well, tell us the dream, and there's six adults sitting around the table and, you know, we're ready for this dream, or so we think, and then he says, okay, I was out in this field and I was surrounded by beaked dwarfs, and they came up to my knees, and so these dwarfs they had no arms, they just had shoulders, and powerful legs, and they had, they were all covered with hair, and they had a cross shaved on the top of their head, and they were all covered with grease, and everywhere I went these dwarfs would jump up with their beaks and bite me, and you're looking at him like, that accounts for the night terrors, right, and so then he says, yeah, and there's more to it too; if, if you look in the background behind all the dwarfs there was a dragon way in the background and it was puffing out fire and smoke, and every time it puffed out fire and smoke, a whole bunch more of these dwarfs would get made, and you think, that's pretty cool, that's a hydra story, right, remember the story of the hydra, cut off one head, two more grows, it's one of Hercules' trials, and that's an observation about the world, which is, you solve one problem, and like two more problems pop up, and then you solve those and... Anyways, he says, okay, well I've got this dragon back there, and so this is his problem, right, he's been eaten by beaked dwarfs, and that's not good, and there's not much sense fighting them off because there's just more of them made every time this thing lurking in the background breathes, so I said, what could you do about that it's like his brain was working all these ideas around and he'd heard lots of Disney stories and had lots of books read to him, and had abstracted out a lot of information, but he hadn't quite got it right, and it was all seething around in his head, and I just said, well, what could you do, tap, and he went, oh I know what I could do. I could take my sword and I'd get my dad, which is a good notion, right, 'cause he's small, and then I'd jump up on the dragon and I'd pop out both of its eyes with the sword so it couldn't see me, and then I'd go down its throat to the box where the fire came out, and then I'd carve a piece out of the box and I'd use that as a shield, and I thought, great, you really got the story, and the story's something like this, right: If you're being plagued by midget dwarfs and you wipe them out and they keep multiplying, well you're obviously aiming at the wrong target, right, you should be going to their source, so he went after the dragon, but not only after the dragon, he went right down the throat of the dragon, which is, you know, a fairly brave thing to do, and then right to the place where the fire, the transforming element, was being produced, and he took a piece of the device that made the transforming element, and he used it as a shield. Okay. Well that's really cool, and the story's better than that, I think, and it's true even, so it's not one of those fake, he-was-dreaming-and-then-woke-up sort of stories; this actually happened; he didn't have any more nightmares, so when I checked with his mother, repeatedly after that because I thought, well this is too good to be true, right, he's got this terrible night terror thing, he does one little mythological dream thing, and, bang, he's, he's better, but that's the case, it is the case, he didn't have any more nightmares after that, and I think that's because he'd almost already got it, right; he was running around like a knight; he knew, almost, it just had to be made a little more explicit, and not even that explicit 'cause it was still a story. he didn't know you should go to the source of your anxieties, right, to the thing that plagues you the most, and you should explore that in detail until you find the information that it contains that will protect you against it. He couldn't say that, but he could tell the story, and he could act it out, and that looked like it was good enough, so that's pretty cool, so he basically, you know, he managed this, essentially, he fought the dragon of chaos, popped back up, as what, as he who can obtain victory over the dragon of chaos, and that's a pretty good story because it says, well, if your frame of reference gets blown away by something you don't understand, some new challenge, and you face the challenge, at least courageously and, and humbly, which means, you know, you're not gonna run away, and you still have something to learn, then you can extract something out of the battle that will enable you to withstand it. and you think, well why should I believe that, right, and the answer to that would be, well, don't knock it till you try it, and the second answer would be, that's exactly what we do in clinical psychotherapy all the time, and there's endless amounts, I think, of empirical evidence saying that, you bring someone in, they've got an anxiety disorder, maybe they're even depressed, whatever, they're running away. You say, you actually don't have to run away; here's what you have to do: you have to break the problem down into little pieces, digestible pieces, and then you have to hit it one by one, and what you'll discover is, not that you habituate to the anxiety because that's a silly theory; instead what you discover is that you thought you were the person who had to run away, but it turns out you're not the person who has to run away, you're the person that can stand there while you're anxious and learn something, and what you most particularly learn is that you're the person who can stand there when they're anxious and learn, and if you've learned that, you don't have to be anxious anymore, or even more importantly, if you're anxious, it doesn't matter, it doesn't mean your life's over, it just means that there you are on the threshold, right, between what you know and what you don't know, and you have something to learn, and you can learn it, and I think that's what the empirical evidence suggests too because you got Edna Foa's work with post-traumatic stress disorder victims, primarily women who were violently raped, and Foa says, well I know you don't like to think about the event, and it's no bloody wonder, look what it did to you, and how terrible it was, but if you re-live it over and over and over again in your imagination, in as much detail as possible, including all the motivational and emotional details, which she measures psycho-physiologically, you will get better faster and you will stay better longer, and her work's well documented, and then there's endless cases of exposure in psychotherapy, you can certainly eliminate simple phobias within an hour, and even complex phobias like agoraphobia, which is more like fear of everything. It's not an intractable disorder Imagine that throughout your whole life you never turned away from a mistake, not even once, never. So that whenever you made a mistake that you could rectify, you did rectify it. Then the question would be well, what, what exactly would you be like? Would you be suffering from all your existential trouble? Would you be vulnerable to anxiety? What would you be like? And then I think well I only know a couple of stories like that. And the one that I told you is the story of Solzhenitsyn. Because Solzhenitsyn, a Russian novelist sitting in the concentration camps in the Gulag archipelago thinking, starving, this isn't so good. How in the world did I get here? And the simple story is well Stalin put you there and he was bad, right? End of story. It's not your problem. Stalin's problem. But Solzhenitsyn said well, that doesn't really leave me anything to do right, to construe myself as a simple victim of fate? And I do have a lot of time on my hands since I'm not really doing anything that requires a tremendous amount of intellectual effort. Let's try a game. Let's do this. Let's pretend that the reason that things happen to me that I don't like even terrible things say, or that I can't tolerate, is not because I'm a victim of fate, evil cruel fate, but because there's something I didn't do. And so Solzhenitsyn said well, I'm gonna go back over my whole life, right? Step by step, detail by detail. And I'm gonna try to remember every time I let something go or I didn't do something I was supposed to. Not because of some adherence to some you know, arbitrary moral code, cause we don't believe in those anyways, right? But just because I noted that I can tell when I owe a debt to existence, right? So then you look at Solzhenitsyn and he says okay, well so I spent fifteen years trying to untie all the knots that I tied up in my brain. And the consequence was, of that was first I started to notice there are some people out there I really admired, man. They were so tough it was unbelievable. You put them in the worst circumstances and they didn't bend an inch. They were tough. And even the nastiest prison guards in the... well, they could kill them, that's for sure. But they couldn't bend them. And they couldn't break them. And I really learned something from that, right? And it's a good story. Because he's in the worst possible circumstance. So there's kind of no bottom past that. You don't get much worse than the Gulag prison camp, right? That's, it's cold. You don't get anything to eat and you're being worked to death, right? For something pointless. And to serve Stalin. That's, that's the bottom. And he said even under those circumstances there were still people who could, who could thrive, who could manifest admirable qualities. He said once I figured out I was wrong, I could actually find them and learn from them. Then he wrote this book, which you know about, the Gulag Archipelago, which was released in the west and then circulated all through the Soviet Union. And was undoubtedly one of the factors that contributed to the demise of the Soviet Union. And so then you think well that's pretty interesting, isn't it? You got this one wacko, right? Russian prisoner, starving to death. Tattooed. He says maybe I had something to do with this. But he didn't mean it in some casual sort of, maybe I had something to do with this way. He meant geez, this is really awful. Doesn't get much worse. Maybe it's my fault. You know, I don't know how it could be. But it, after all I'm the one that's suffering. So, maybe it was me. Maybe I could fix it. What would happen if I did? And so his conclusion was at the end. And it's not a conclusion that he reached alone, was one person who stops lying can bring down a tyranny. And you think that's a metaphorical statement, right? Because you're the victim of your own tyrannies, just as you are the victim of someone else's tyrannies. And maybe if you stop lying, construed in this manner of sin of omission, right? Don't avoid anomalies anymore. But confront them head on. Maybe if you quit lying, well then you wouldn't be victim of tyranny. Maybe no one else would be either. The G.R.E. say, the bad exam, that's a bad thing, but it's not the worst thing; the worst thing is the sort of thing that knocks existentialists for a loop, right, the worst thing is more like Ivan Karamazov's suffering of innocent children, right, the fact that children are tortured, or the worst thing is the fact that perfectly good people get sick and die, and sometimes painfully, or the worst thing is there are tyrants all over the world and they torture people for no cause or maybe even just because they like torturing people, and that's an anomaly of a different order, right, it's not just that you're going from Point A to B and something you don't like happens, it's more like thee are some aspects of existence that look so terrible in and of themselves associated with our vulnerability that just apprehending them might be enough to knock the bottom out of your faith in any frame of reference, and that's a kind of Nietzschean theme, Nietzsche says: look, when you're going from Point A to B and something bad happens, something you don't expect, you don't get to where you wanted to go, that's bad, but what's even worse is, you can't have any faith in the frame of reference that you were using, 'cause it's been invalidated, but what's even worst is, you plow your way through two or three frames of reference, and then you start to develop some skepticism about frames of reference in general, right. so I was a socialist, say, and then I was a Catholic, and, you know then I developed some new age philosophy, and none of those really worked, and what that made me think was, well you can't trust socialism, you can't trust Christianity, and those new age people are certainly out to lunch, maybe you can't trust any frames of reference, and that's a really devastating discovery, and Nietzsche associated that with the death of God, right, it's like, no frames of reference work, and then you have the problem that, well, without a frame of reference life is chaos, and chaos is intolerable, and therefore logically life is intolerable, and I tried to make a case for you then that's kind of a side case, which was, people protect their ideologies 'cause they don't want to lose their frames of reference, they don't want to fall into chaos, but then there's this additional problem, which is that you can develop a kind of deep cynicism about life in a secondary manner, which is like constant loss of faith. maybe what you conclude under those conditions, like the aggressive child concludes, is that, fundamentally, I'm not to be trusted, you're not to be trusted, society is not to be trusted, and maybe the structure of the world as a whole isn't to be trusted, and, therefore, logically, you're more or less obligated to work against it, and so then you have a nice sub-story for the propagation of evil, which is, well, we like to have our ideological frames of reference retained, and that gives us ample reason to squash anyone that's different, but then there's this additional reason, which is, when you get right down to it, things are pretty, bloody awful, and maybe the sensible thing to do is to just work for the in annihilation of things, and I think we've had endless examples of people who did precisely that in the 20th Century and almost got away with it, in case you're tempted not to take this sufficiently seriously, right, we know that Stalin, in all likelihood,, who I think you could make a case for being if not the most evil man that ever lived, certainly the most evil man that lived this century, and that's really a high honor, right, 'cause he was up against some really top contenders. We know, as a consequence of recently-released KGB documents, that he was probably gearing up to start the Third World War, and not one of these little half-rate, you know, little local Third World Wars, we are talking about the whole H bomb exchange thing designed to eradicate, you know, the U.S. for sure, but also the Soviet Union, and, well, mere territoriality isn't enough to account for that, but then maybe you can see Stalin's point, right, like Tolstoy can see it, you know, if life is really so awful at bottom, which there are perspectives from which that certainly seems to be the case, then why bother having it around at all. Well, you know, that's a pretty dismal perspective, so that's a real anomaly, right, that's not one of these little second-rate you'll-get-over-it-in-a-month-or-two anomalies, this is the sort of anomaly that's laid out in Genesis, where Adam and Eve discover that they're mortal, vulnerable, they're gonna die, that really takes the shine off existence out of paradise they go, they wander around the planet for the rest of history, you know, working themselves to death and being miserable and killing each other, and that's basically the story that's laid out in the Old Testament, and viewed from that perspective, well, it's not precisely an empirical description of the big bang say, but it's not a bad description of the nature of human existence, and it's pretty dismal There's an essential symbolic relationship between the ingestion of food and its transformative capacities and the, and the ingestion of ideas, and their transformative capacity. and what happens when Adam and Eve eat this fruit, which they're not supposed to eat, is that they learn that they're going to die, and that screws up Paradise, and in case you just think I'm making this up, which would be, you know, kind of annoying, then you want to look at this picture, which is from the 14th Century, and it's a really remarkable picture, so what you've got in the middle here is the, the tree of the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil, and you've got Eve over here, and you've got the Church here, and what you see happening, you got to look really carefully at this tree 'cause the first thing you see is it's got this snake wrapped around it, this agent of transformation, right, who's associated with Satan, and then up in the branches you have apples and you have skulls, and then if you look at Eve here, she's got grapes here, and a skull in her hand, and what this artist is trying to indicate is that there's this tight relationship between Eve tempting Adam towards higher knowledge and delivering him death. so that's a pretty dismal story, and all the people over here on the left side, all these unhappy people, are the people who are living in chaos and misery as a consequence of being, of having their vulnerability revealed to them, and that's the negative side of the story, but then there's the positive side of the story over here, and it's, it's just as complicated, and that's partly why it's expressed in imagistic form, so you've got the Church here, symbolized at least in part as Mary, and she's handing out something too, and if you look at those they're little round circles with crosses on them, and what those are, are hosts, hosts, they're the symbols of transformation, particularly in Catholicism; now that's a very complicated idea, and this is the idea, it's something like this: At Christ's last supper before he was crucified, he told his disciples that they were going to have to ingest him, right, so they gave them wine and bread, and the wine was blood and the bread was flesh, and what's the idea, what does it mean to incorporate someone? It means to embody them, that's what it means, and this, this imagistic ritualistic process, is the notion that in order to attain redemption, it's necessary to embody the hero, and that's kind of what this picture is trying to portray, it says, okay, well you got this death apple over on the left-hand side, and that's not so good, and you need an antidote to it, and the antidote is whatever this represents, whatever this represents, and you see up in the tree here there's all these hosts hanging. Now the hosts are representative of Christ, and for complicated reasons they're made out of wheat, say, and partly the reason they're made out of wheat is because if you look at hero Gods prior to Christianity, you see that wheat was often conceptualized as a dying and redeemed God, right, because it would die in the Winter and then be re-born in the Spring, just like all plants are, and the notion of the dying and redeeming, the dying and resurrecting hero, was kind of, what would you say, layered on top of that older agrarian idea, and all mixed together, and it sort of popped out in this idea of the, of the host, and so the idea here is that whatever ails human beings, which is their knowledge of vulnerability and death, can be rectified by their incorporation of whatever this symbol represents, and so then you might ask, well what exactly does that symbol represent, and, of course, the standard Christian answers to that, and the extended Christian answers are, well it represents your faith in Christ, say, but that's not a very useful answer, all things considered, so let's look at it in a little bit more complicated way. It's not a useful answer I think because it's too sectarian, right, it excludes many, many people, this notion, and there's a whole formalism that you have to buy into to even get access to what that story means, and it's an unfortunate formalism because first of all I think it's more appropriate to an earlier time and place, and second of all because I think we're actually sophisticated enough now intellectually, psychologically, to actually start to understand what some of these stories mean, and since we have reasonably well-developed brains, and we might as well use them, it would be better if they were on our side, so to speak, than constantly conspiring to undermine our faith, let's look at what a person is like. And a person is sort of just as complicated as a, an object, which is not that surprising cause there's an aspect of us that is object like, right? Our objective being. And we know people are unbelievably complicated. They have they have nervous systems that have more connections in them than there are subatomic particles in the universe, just for starters. And so that means that when you're looking at another person, you're looking at something that's more complicated than anything else that exists anywhere, including the sum total of everything that exists everywhere, except other people. More complex than everything. And then you have to understand too that just because you don't think of yourself that way doesn't mean you're not that way. It just means that you're conscious mind, your rational mind say isn't sophisticated enough to actually completely model who or what you are. And that's obvious because that's why we study ourselves. We don't know who we are. We're trying to figure it out. We've been trying to figure it out ever since we woke some thousands of years ago. We don't know when And you think well if you look at people, well you know, there's the kind of obvious level that you see people at, the self level, which is the privileged level of analysis for the west. But you're a member of a family. And if I said well are you more yourself or your family, you might say well, most of the time I think I'm more myself, but I might be willing to sacrifice my life for my child's. In which case I would say well, then you're just as much your child as you are you. Or maybe you're even more your child. And what about your family? Well that's a tough question too. And then what about your cultural group? Well you say no, it's me, not my cultural group. But then I'd say well what if there's a war? Is it you or your cultural group? And then you'll say oh it's my cultural group. And then you see as well, well at this level of analysis are you your biological group? Is that what you identify with, the biosphere say? Say well no, not generally. But there's a lot of environmentalists out there. And they say well what we should primarily be concerned with is the global health of the planet because our survival depends on that. We're as much that as we are the self. And you might not agree with that. And I suspect that most of the time there's screwy reasons for proposing such a thing. But on the other hand, a case can be made. I mean we know that you can undermine your ecosystems. It happened in Spain. They let, four hundred years ago they let the sheep eat everything. And so Spain turned into a desert. Doesn't seem like a particularly wise move. And then you think well below the phenomenological level there's all these sub elements of you, your physiological structure, your cellular structure, your atomic structure. To infinite investigation. Absolutely complex. You'll never exhaust it if you investigate it. And it's perfectly reasonable to presuppose that you're all these things How does it change the world if you stop thinking about it as made of objects? But, but instead made of your own experience. And how does it change the world if you think you have an ethical relationship with that experience that, that's a primary fact, not some secondary derivative. So primary a fact that you can't even look at the world except through an ethical lens, primary fact. What is, how does that change the way you conceptualize yourself in relationship to the world? I don't know.
You really can't tell the meaning of someone's life till the very end. And it's for the same reason, right, is that how all the pieces fit together in the story or in the life is not necessarily determined until the final moment. And I think that's part of the reason too, why among Catholics, for example, and Christians in general, there's an idea that salvation can always be attained, right? Right up to the last moment, no matter what your life was like. And you think: Well, that's a pretty cheap trick, you know, because you can run around doing terrible things your whole life, but as long as you can get it together at the last second, then you're Scot-free. But if you think about it in terms of a story, then you can understand how that could conceivably be the case. And it's for this reason, of course, that this lecture in particular makes me nervous more than any of the other ones I do, because I've been telling you a story that's basically 40 hours long, right, and its spoken forum, and then who knows how long in its written form. And it's complicated to pull it together properly. And that's partly because, as far as I've been concerned, we've been talking about issues in psychology that are more difficult than any other. First of all, conceptually, even from a neuropsychological perspective, because I've been offering you a model of the way the brain processes the environment, that I think is really novel. And I think it reflects the current state of neuroscience. And - but more than that, there's the problem that we've been dealing with issues all the way along of life and death, and of war and destruction, and of the possibility for clear-headed optimism, right? and possibility which, as we've discussed, more or less escaped Tolstoy, say, for most of his life, right, because when Tolstoy woke up from his delusions, he looked at the world and he said: Well, clearly it's such a terrible place that, if you're not looking at it through the veils of illusion, there's no way that you can do anything but stand in opposition to it once you understand its basic structure, right? Suffering and innocence suffering, and complete vulnerability, and the whole existential mess that makes up life. Now it turns out that Tolstoy overcame his rationally induced cynicism in a kind of mystical way. He had a dream that he was suspended from some transcendent space by a belt around the middle of his waist, which hung him over a pit of chaos. And in that image, he found comfort. And fair enough, it's a powerful image. But it's not well delineated, right? And it worked well for Tolstoy, and you can see that the image has power, but you can't-- you can't grab it with your rational mind. You can't take it into pieces and analyze it as an argument. And that's what we do if we're intellectuals, right? We try to understand the detailed structure of something. And I think the detailed structure of what Tolstoy apprehended as optimistic is actually comprehensible. And we've been working towards that and circling around it the entire course of this lecture series. But I have found with this material that with each circling around the target, it gets clearer and clearer. It's a funny thing. It's like you're looking at something that's too complicated to see all at once. So you have to look at it from multiple different perspectives, and again and again. And each time you look at it, it becomes clearer and clearer. And that's still the case for me when I go through this material. Every time I go through it, I think: Oh yeah, that piece fits there. And that piece fits there. And that's how that makes sense. And: Oh that's a lot more remarkable than I thought it was to begin with... and so on. And it seems fundamentally inexhaustible. And of course, that's what you'd expect from deep, deep stories, right? Stories that have been around for thousands and thousands of years, wouldn't have been around for thousands and thousands of years unless they were in some sense inexhaustible. And we've talked about some of the processes that might contribute to that inexhaustibility. So at the beginning of the lecture series, I told you to consider the assumption that there was more than one way of looking at the world, right? There was the standard materialist sort of scientific viewpoint, which was that the world was made up of objects - independently existent, as among them - the objects have no intrinsic value, one way or another. And the issue of meaning per se wasn't included in that account. And then I said: Well wait, there's another way of looking at the world, that we spent just as much time developing, that we utilize even more, and that's the narrative... That's the narrative way of looking at the world; to consider the nature of experience rather than the nature of objects as real; to consider your experience as real, even though it includes things that can't be easily and tangibly identified - things like emotions, which of course you find compelling, sometimes even beyond your will. Things like motivational states, fantasies, ideals, all the things that compel your behaviour and give you some sense that there's a direction to life. people who study emotion and perception have come to understand that the act of transforming the world into something simply made out of objects is incredibly difficult. It's so difficult that we haven't been able to design machines that can do it at all. It turns out also that when we look at the world, we're not just looking at it with our visual systems, but we're looking at it with our motor output systems and our emotions. So that, when you look at something like a chair, which just stands there for you like an object, it turns out that the mechanical systems - the motor systems - that you would use to use the chair to sit on it are activated during the act of perception. It also turns out sometimes that when you look at something, especially if it's something you don't understand and that it's - and that scares you - you actually react to it; conceptualize it with your body and with your emotions before you have any idea what it is from the perspective of an object. When you look at the world and when you think about the world, you have to do it from a motivated perspective and an emotionally ridden perspective. You can't even see the world without being gripped by your motivation and emotional states. And so, the idea that rationality or perception is somehow separate from, or super-ordinate to perception and emotion is just wrong. We understand now that you can't even think without being motivated. You can't see the world without being motivated. And that means you always look at the world through a kind of lens. And the lens is a narrowing lens, and it has to be because the world is so complicated, you can't see it all at once. You're only seeing tiny slices of it in time, and tiny slices of it in space. And even then, you have to narrow it to only those things that are relevant to you at that moment. And we don't know exactly how you do that. We know that it takes years and years of perceptual work in infancy, say so that you manage to build up an object conception of the world. That's probably all your doing in the first two or three years of life. And you're doing it constantly. And it's just as complicated as learning language, say, or even more complicated. Most of it's invisible, and we don't know how children do that. And by the time they can talk, they've already done it. So, they can't even tell us what they're doing. It takes a long time to build up an object world. And when you look at the world - when you go from Point A to Point B - even when you're doing something as simple as looking for food in-in the kitchen, you ignore everything about the world that isn't relevant to making yourself a peanut butter sandwich, and you focus in on those few things that are - the refrigerator, the food, the knives, the cutlery, and so on. And everything else is screened out. Then, you can't help but look at the world through that kind of lens. And the lenses change and you can be in different motivational states, and they can change because of internal transformations. You're not hungry. You're thirsty. Or you're not thirsty, you're interested in someone. Or somebody is telling you a story and then you adopt their motivational framework, and you can see the world through their eyes. And now, we know the neural machinery for that, and we already talked about that. So, we can toss back and forth these motivational frames of reference and that gives us insight into someone else's world. You can look at the world endless numbers of ways. And what you're trying to do it, out of its infinite richness, so to speak, is to pull out parts of it that are useful for you while you're moving from Point A to Point B. And this can be a chair, if you want to sit down. But if you want to take a light bulb out of the ceiling, then it's a stool, or a table. And whether or not it's a chair, or a stool, or a table depends just as much on what you're doing as it does on what it is. And I think that's part of the reason why human beings can be so infinitely creative, right? For us, the world isn't fixed. We never know what it's going to bring forth. So, 100 years ago, if someone would have said: Well, you could build a machine on a wafer a centimetre square out of sand and if you have enough of those machines then everyone in the world can be connected, and everyone in the world can have an infinite library of verbal material, right? That's impossible, but it-it's not impossible. It turns out that silica has those properties, and we can build unbelievably powerful machines out of nothing And so then, that kind of makes you think about just what this nothing that we're building things out of is, right? Because it seems to be able to reveal a constant array of properties; properties that are essentially unlimited. And it's capacity to reveal those properties seems to depend as much on our ability to interact with it - whatever that is - as it does on whatever the stuff is. And we know, even from a strict object perception of the world that the stuff that things are made of is a lot more complicated than we had originally presumed, even as materialists, because materialists, realists, their philosophy only holds down to about the subatomic level of analysis - a deterministic worldview. Below the subatomic level of analysis, there's nothing deterministic at all. And the stuff that things are made of is so mysterious that we can't even-- we can't grasp it. We can't comprehend it. So it turns out that rather than the story world be, being dependent on the object world, it might be the other way around. The object world is dependent on the story world. And that implies at least to some degree that the story world is actually more real, whatever that means. And then, I told you that, well, the real problem of life isn't so much "What do you do when you're around things that you understand?" The real problem of life is: "What do you do when you encounter something you can't conceptualize?" And I think a good recent example of that was the bombing of the World Trade Towers, which people were compelled to watch over and over and over and over. And if you ask someone: Well, what is it that you're watching? They would say: Well, I'm watching the World Trade Towers fall down but then, you might say: Well, why are you watching it over and over? And they would say something like: Well, I can't believe it. I can't believe it's happening. And what does that mean? It means something like: Whatever it is that's happening here - whatever's being blown apart - exceeds my ability to model. And as a consequence, I have to expose myself to it again and again and again, and again, to try to understand what's falling. Like, what's falling exactly? Is it just the towers? Is it 20,000 people? Is it the financial system of the U.S.? Is it the stability of the western world? Is it the beginning of World War III? Or as the former CIA director just mentioned in the U.S.: The beginning of World War IV. What is it exactly that you're looking at when something happens that you don't understand? And then you say: Well, how do you react to that? And it turns out that you react mostly with your body - not with your mind, not with your perceptual systems, not with your thoughts - but with your emotions and your body. And that means you sweat, and you panic, and you feel depressed, and you feel hurt, and you feel ashamed. And you're prepared for a catastrophe, which is stress. And all that's basically non-cognitive and-- What that kind of means is that, when you encounter something you don't understand the first manner in which you conceive of it, is embodied; emotional, physical, way before you develop up an object representation, or a cognitive representation. You may not ever get it. Like, an event like that, or a worse event, can throw someone into a tailspin that's so extreme that they never get out of it. So you'll see, for example, sometimes - and this is more true among elderly people if their spouse dies - the probability that they'll die in the next year - say, from a heart attack or something like that - increases substantially. Why is that? It's because their conceptual frame was so dependent on the existence of their spouse - say, someone they've lived with for 25 years - that the anxiety and uncertainty caused by their own anomalous disappearance - their death is so extreme - that it sends their body into a physiological state that's basically unbearable. And that does them in. And when you start to understand what having your preconceptions rattled really means, then you also start to understand why people are so motivated to protect their ideological territory, right - ideological territory-- that's how you see the world. That's your story. And you can't have your fundaments rattled all the time because it throws everything into chaos, and that puts you in this terrible, panicky, cortizol-ridden, stressful state that's really hard on you physically. So we know for example that if you're in a state where you're chronically exposed to threat or punishment, which is the case in depression, say, you produce a lot of cortizol, which is a stress hormone, and cortizol is toxic. So the more of it you produce, the more you kill off your hippocampus cells, and you really need them because they're a key to memory. You do in your immunological system-- there's all sorts of negative side effects of cortizol poisoning - increase incidents of cardiovascular disease, heightened rate of cancer. Plus, it's just no fun, right? It's the worst thing that can possibly happen to you, essentially. If something unknown happens to you and blows your frame of reference, right - knocks you for a loop, sends you to the underworld, however you want to construe it - that's really going to upset your bandwagon and throw you into a state that you'd do virtually anything to avoid. But by the same token, there is a possibility that inside that chaotic nest, there's something you really need. And what's the logic there? Well, the logic is something like this: When you look at the world, you only see a fragment of it. And that's good because it's pretty overwhelming, and a fragment's generally more than enough. But all the information that you've ever gathered in your entire life - to build yourself out of, and to make your life stable - has come as a consequence of your ability to explore what you don't understand. And that's an unlimited capacity, right? No matter how much you explore and how much information you gather, there's always the possibility that there's way more information out there. And that means, if you have a problem and you see that it's a problem, even though that's frightening, it's also a gateway into a domain of possibility; and the possibility is this richly informative background that could, in principle, provide you with any answer you need And then you can think one more thing. And the old gods, Mars say, the god of war. Venus, the god of love. They're all internalized for us, right? We know that anger's a psychological state. Love is a psychological state. But if we look at our great religious traditions, Christianity say, or Buddhism, just to take two as an example. We still have this notion that what these figures represent is something external. Well you might say how primitive, right? Just as primitive as the idea that the god of war is something external is the idea that this sort of figure is supposed to be something external. It's supposed to be something embodied, right? It's a story about the nature of individual moral responsibility So the idea is something like this, well reality itself, the existence of things seems to depend on the existence of a finite observer. So that we can see things from a perspective. If you don't see things from a perspective, everything is the same. There's nothing delineated. But if there's gonna be delineated things, small things, insufficient things, and they're gonna be aware, they're gonna be vulnerable as a part of their limitation. And so you say well, limitation is a precondition for being. And that means suffering is part and parcel of being Dostoevsky said clearly, look, I give you all the cake you want. You got a big house. You got nothing to do but watch TV, right? And propagate the species. Are you happy? And Dostoevsky says well no. Why? Well cause human beings are really fundamentally you know, ungrateful and insane. So if you give them some little comfortable niche to occupy themselves with so they don't have anything to worry about, the first thing they're gonna do just like Adam and Eve basically or just like Buddha, they're gonna run around looking for the apple, looking for the snake, looking for the trouble to smash the frame into bits no matter how comfortable it is just so they can get access to a little chaos and have some fun. And so then you think well maybe it's more like the purpose of life isn't to avoid chaos because we like chaos. It's entertaining, right? It keeps us alert and awake. And it gives us something to do that really has no end. And so maybe the answer is something more like well forget the frame of reference. And forget the chaos but hit the balance right between the two, right? So that you got one foot where it's reasonably comfortable. And you got one foot out there where it's kind of exciting and dangerous. And that's perfect. And then you think the state you wanna attain that makes you resistant to even the greatest anomalies, anomalies of death say or vulnerability or mortality is exactly that, that position, right? Balanced right between the forces of chaos and the forces of order or between, between yin and yang. And how do you know you're there? Cause that's what it really boils down to. How do you know that you're there? And then you think okay, it's pretty simple. You watch with your eyes open, just like Solzhenitsyn watched. You think, I don't know everything. So let's see what I do know. No preconceptions. I'm not gonna shield myself from the truth with some second rate frame of reference. We don't believe in those anyways cause they're always fragmentable. I'm just gonna watch. So when am I not miserable? And then you think well, I'm not miserable when I'm interested in thing, something, I get interested in something. I don't exactly know why I get interested in it. It catches me. And what are the, what's the phenomenology of being caught? I'm not self-conscious when I'm engaged in something. I'm more like a child, which is why children have intonations of immortality. I'm engaged in this process. I don't think about myself, so I'm not self-conscious. I lose my sense of temporality because it seems like I can do whatever it is that I'm doing, thing that I enjoy for hours. And the time flies by. And I'm not even really aware of the surrounding world. And none of my existential concerns are paramount at that time. Every need is suppressed by my engagement in the activity. And then you say to yourself well, yeah, that only happens like you know, ten minutes every three days or something when I'm being particularly miserable. But you might say well the fact that it happens at all is probably worth paying attention to. I mean if you believe that your experience is real, like real, the fact that you can get into a state like that at all is worth paying attention to. And so then you might say well that's, that's where you're sense of ethics really starts to arise. what makes you interested? Well it might be just as cracked and, and, and peculiar as something you could possibly imagine, right? Your parents are against it. Your friends are against it. Even you're against it when you're thinking clearly. But there's still this reality that something compels you. And then you think well can you trust it? And I think well that's a tough question because I read a long time, for a long time I read accounts of serial killers. Cause I was really interested in what motivated them, right? And they're an interesting breed in many ways, which is why there's such a popular fascination with them. And you think geez, maybe you can't trust your interest, right? Maybe it'll take you somewhere you don't wanna go, like seriously where you don't wanna go. How do you know that if you really let yourself be who you could be, that you'd end up somewhere good. And so then you come to the second part of the story, which is something like this; let's say that you're a very, very, very finely tuned biological machine, right? Akin to a computer. And then you say okay, you take a computer and you feed it false information. What do you get out? False information, right? Well you're stuck with this computer. It's very complicated. You kind of reside in it in some manner you don't understand. And yet, you're prone on occasions either to deny the information altogether when you walk away from something you know you shouldn't walk from. Or to feed it bad information. And so then what if it, what if this was the case? What if it was the case that the systems that orient you with regards to your interest can become pathologized by any relationship you have with yourself that's predicated on bad faith? And so then you think well, that's why there's an ethical aspect to this redemptive process. Like a real strenuous and strict ethical aspect that goes something like this; There are things that you can do, find yourself engaged with the world at such a level that your existential concerns could disappear. And we can even understand that biochemically to some degree because if you're really interested in something you got a dopamine release an exploratory dopamine release. That's great. I mean that's associated with positive affect, with confidence, with increased immunological functioning, with better memory functioning. With learning. Everything you want. It's also potently anxiolytic and analgesic, which means that if you're really pursuing something that's compelling to you, you're much more resistant biochemically to punishment, disappointment, depression, pain, threat, etcetera. And it's not cause you're blind. It's not cause you're blind. It's cause your nervous system is optimally tuned to make you maximally resistant. And so then you might think if you were optimally tuned, how resistant would you be? You don't know, right? Cause it's in a spiral that never stops moving uphill. We don't know what the upper end is. And we have exemplars that might indicate what that upper end could be. But we don't actually know. So then you think okay, well here's the here's the rule, say, something like this. If you look at the world from this perspective, which is something you have to decide if you're you know, you find compelling and reasonable, the rule is this; you're always gonna run into anomaly, right? And anomaly's always gonna look, look to you like, like this. And it's no bloody wonder you wanna run away from that. I mean in some ways your whole body's telling you watch out, and for good reason because it's no joke. But then there's more to the story because the anomalous thing, that's everything you don't know. you might say well, you're going out with someone and you wanna have a long term relationship. They betray you. How could there be any good in that? That's certainly what you're gonna ask when you first encounter the unexpected information But then you might think could be that I'm a little too naive for my own good. Right? People pull me in a little more than they should or I'm not sufficiently careful when I enter into a relationship with people. Or I don't treat people right. Or I don't have a good conceptualization of myself. Or I'm chasing after the wrong person. Well that's all gonna be very annoying to learn. But if you don't learn it you're gonna be in big trouble. So maybe the best thing to do when an anomaly of that sort hits you is to think okay, yeah, it's a dragon. No doubt it will eat me. But if I don't let it eat me then there'll just be another one waiting around the corner and it'll probably be a little bit bigger. And if I get eaten by enough of them, I'm not really gonna wanna be around much. And maybe I'm not gonna be willing to help other people be around much either. Doesn't seem like a very good alternative to me. So back in 1957, some new Gnostic writings were discovered in a, in a cave. They were discovered by these two Arab guys who went out to kill the man who killed their father. They took him out into this cave and they killed him. And when they were burying him they found these amphora full of papers and papyrus. And they took them home. And their mother used a bunch of them to light cooking fires with. And one day one of their friends who was an antiquities dealer showed up. And he said you know you shouldn't be burning those. Those are about fifteen hundred years old. And they look like very early Gnostic gospels And the Gnostics were this branch of Christianity that was pretty violently suppressed by the emergence of Orthodox Christianity. And the Gnostics believed that faith was a good thing but knowledge was all right too. And they wrote gospel accounts say of Christ's life that were knowledge predicated as much as revelation predicated say. And this is one of the quotes from one of those gospels, the gospel of Thomas, which is actually one that, the only one that got out. Carl Jung got a hold of them, interestingly enough. And this is one of the quotes. And I really like this. This is a non-canonical saying of Christ. And the saying is: "if you bring forth what is within you what you bring forth will save you. If you do not bring forth what is within you, what you do not bring forth will destroy you." And I think that's a pretty good line to close off the class. So thank you for attending. (clapping) (End)